Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Coley Moore, joined as always by my co-host, Kyle Helson. I want to thank everybody for listening as always. Please subscribe to the podcast. And, well, if you haven't, and if this is your first time listening, that would be great. And share it with a friend. That's the best thing you can do to support the podcast. iTunes rating of five stars would be excellent. And also we're ad-free. So at empiricalcycling.com slash donate, you can make a monetary donation. Even just a dollar a show would be phenomenal. If we put out four shows a month, four bucks. Thanks so much. Appreciate it. Goes a long way. We have show notes up on the website. There are probably not going to be any show notes for today, but it's at empiricalcycling.com, of course. And you can see all the other old podcast episodes there with the notes. And if you have any coaching, consultation, inquiries, questions, comments, email me at empiricalcycling at gmail.com. Also, the idea for this episode came from Instagram. So you could follow me over there at Empirical Cycling. And because I'm the worst marketer in the world, it's almost all in the stories. I do very little actual advertising of services and such over there. It's all pictures of bike races and occasionally cats. And so up in the stories, also on the weekend, AMAs. And I use that to generate the idea for this podcast because we have now had 200,000 listens. which it's very long 200 kilo listens and on Instagram I asked for ideas and there were some really excellent ones there were some really bad ones I kind of made a poll we did two rounds and the idea was to do the top best and worst workouts which narrowly beat out well somewhat narrowly beat out TTE and FTP, which I think we're going to do anyway, because that's going to fit very nicely into the metabolism series as probably a finale. So we're going to do that in a couple episodes. But first, we're going to do this episode and maybe another 10 minute tips or two this week. So what we're going to do is Kyle and I are going to, we have not seen each other's lists of Five Bad Workouts and Five Good Workouts. And we're going to kind of go back and forth and discuss as we go. And I've heard podcasts with this kind of premise before, and sometimes it rolls like an egg and sometimes it's really good. So if it doesn't go that smoothly, we apologize and hope it's good listening anyway. So why don't we... Be forewarned. We also did not put any clarification on best or worst. These may also be best or worse for some definition of best or worse that may not align with the other definitions of best or worst. Yeah, I think the disclaimer that we need to make before we get started here is actually that if you do any of these workouts and you find that they really work well for you, that's fine. It really is. So if you disagree with us and that happens. That's okay, and we appreciate you listening anyway. So, Kyle, what's your first bad workout? My first bad workout, and this one is actually relevant to our recent series on strength training. My first one is going to be when people tell you to do something like 5x5 or 5x8 or something like that at... 60 RPM on a big gear because that is your strength training work for the day or the week or whatever. I remember a long time ago, yeah, I saw an article that was like Brad Wiggins training for the tour. He was doing climbs at like 50 RPM and in the article it said this was weight training for cyclists. Yeah, and I think this isn't as common as it used to be because I think even... I think even in Friel's book, he does a calculation like even if you do VO2 max-esque powers at low RPMs, the amount of force that you generate on the cranks is still, you know, an order of magnitude lower than what you would do doing leg press or squats or something like that. Well, I think those workouts originally came from a coach named Aldo Sassi who was Famous for coaching who was the guy who was dope to the eyeballs, Ricardo Rico or something like that. But this was like one of his workout ideas was to do low cadence, what he called strength endurance. And you know what's funny is that a lot of people who do this kind of workout, and I definitely assign some low cadence workouts myself, not like constantly, but you know, I do. A lot of people actually find that they work really, really well. for just making you feel stronger with climbing and all sorts of things. Yeah. And that makes sense. There are good reasons why you could do this workout. And like you just said, that in the beginning, these workouts might actually be good for you and you might actually work. But yeah, specifically with the caveat that it's some sort of substitute for strength training is where I'm saying that that's bad. Yeah, it's really not. All right. So my first bad one I have here is VO2 max intervals done as a percentage of your FTP. Nice. Like I'm going to do four by six minutes at 110% or I'm going to do whatever at 115 or 120%. It doesn't matter what percent you're at. Like if you do a – and also they always seem to top out around like 120%. Shorter ones, maybe 125. Kyle, I think you and I have talked about this in the podcast before where our like five minute power has been like up to 150% of our FTPs. Yes. Or like 140%. And that was while doing aerobic training too. So not in current like sprinter shape. So coincidentally, I actually, you've taken one of my worst workouts because I wrote that down as well. I was wondering if we were going to have any overlap. I think this is one of those things that comes about because you look at one of those charts from training and raising a power meter or Friel or something. Oh, VO2 max power starts at 105% to 125% or something of FTP. And that chart with those numbers on it has been around for a very long time. And so that is just something that people rely on as being true. And they're like, oh, that's the VO2 max zone or something. 5x5, 5x8, 8x3, whatever, as a function of this. And you can imagine if you – I mean, imagine doing like 5x5 at like 105% of FTP. I've done it, actually. I had a coach who assigned me similar things. It was like I was doing like two-minute intervals at my like five-minute power, and I'm like going up this hill, breathing through my nose going, what is this doing? Yeah, and – The thing I always think about this, too, is if you do five by five at 105% of your FTP, you are basically doing the power that you did for, like, a 20-minute FTP test broken up into chunks of five minutes. And the first five minutes of a 20-minute FTP test is not hard, like, in any way, unless you, like, way mess up. Well, okay, so here's an idea. Maybe if we can, let's try to incorporate. How can we fix this? One of the interesting things about the original Cog and Power Zones is that they were meant to be descriptive, not prescriptive, which means you go out and kind of do these rides, and then you kind of look back and you go, what does this most likely fall into? And your personalized interval zones, or levels as Andy really prefers to call them, are You know, what the eye levels in WKO5 are about. And so I would assume these are, again, a little more descriptive than prescriptive. But, you know, with WKO5, like, there are guidance for those types of intervals, like max aerobic being the VO2 max type. So, like, you know, it'll look at your power curve. And as long as you've got some good max efforts in most durations, it'll spit out something like, you should probably do... I don't know, three to eight by like five or four or whatever minutes at this power. And this will probably get you pretty close to where you need to be, which is one of those things that just kind of holds over like the original Coggin power zones, like 120%. It's sort of like thinking that all FTP is like four millimoles of blood lactate or all LT1 is like. You know, two millimoles of blood lactate, which is absolutely not the case. We'll talk about that as part of the metabolism series. Does that kind of make sense? Yeah, that makes sense. I also think that it is a really, really easy concrete number to remember. So you look at this chart that just has existed forever. Oh, there are these numbers and they are so well-defined that that's really nice. And it feels nice to grab that like well-defined range as opposed to say, oh, If you are over threshold, good luck. You're going to have to do other work to figure out where you should be doing these. You cannot just take it as a function of FTP. Yeah, exactly. And I also think that this actually comes up in the Instagram AMA frequently. Not every week, but I'd probably say at least once or twice a month where somebody wants to know, are these intervals good for VO2 max? whatever. And my answer is usually like, no, just go max. And that's going to be that. Like, you know, you're doing VO2 max, right? If you're breathing really, really, really hard. And, you know, your VO2 max and your FTP, we did a Wattstock on this. I forget what episode it is. It's the FTP versus VO2 max episode where we look into the Coggin, or not the Coggin, the Coyle paper, Determinants of Endurance in Well-Trained Cyclists, where they look at in liters per minute where your VO2max is relative to your FTP, and people range from like 60 to like 80 some odd percent. It's a huge range, and that's going to affect your five-minute power versus your FTP as well. Not only that, but your anaerobic capacity is too. So I think this is one of those things where... And knowing that, just having that little bit of background information means that you're going to have to either personalize your power targets or you're just going to have to go max. And it's going to hurt, but it should. It should hurt. Yeah, you should be gasping like a fish in a boat. All right, give me a good workout for you, Kyle. A good workout. I did a little bit of a cop-out here, but I'm going to say adding five minutes per rep to whatever the last FTP workout that you did was. Oh man, that is the first one I had too because mine was threshold progression. Oh God. All right. So we started off with 20 and now we're down to 18 of these. All right. Great. So yeah. So for obvious reasons, doing more is better generally and sticking only with two by 20 until you die is Fine, and it might work, but you can probably see some good benefits if you've never done FTP work for longer than 20 minutes of adding in time progression, time-based progression. Yeah, yeah, exactly. And it's like, you know, people do seem to change up their FTP intervals these days from what I see anyway, the people I interact with. So, you know, it's not like totally foregone, but, you know, I got an Instagram question. today, Sunday, today, where somebody was asking, you know, is, you know, doing this workout and like this three by 20, these two workouts a week, is this a good thing? And I'm like, I don't know, what are you training for? Do you want to get faster? Do you want to progress? Like, do you want to, what's the deal? Like, and so, so. I don't have this as a bad workout but this would be a bad workout where like if you are increasing your if you're keeping the FTP interval duration the same and you're increasing the power but the thing is like with the fatigue of the block and you don't know if your FTP is actually going up right unless you are really tuned into your legs like I train some people where I'll give them FTP intervals and they'll be like I could push 5 or 10 watts harder today than I could for this workout or a similar workout last week. I couldn't do as much time, but I know this is my FTP now. And based on their training history, I'll be like, okay, this makes sense. Your FTP is probably getting higher during the block. So we can either stick to the same target and increase time, or you can keep the same time and increase power. This is one of those rare occurrences that most people who have been training for a bit don't do this. Err on the side of caution. Increase the time and zone and then reevaluate your FTP is my suggestion. Yeah. All right. So give me another bad one, Kyle. Any workout where you're actually prescribed to go until you fail? As somebody who's done and assigned these workouts, let's define failure and like what... How are we going to define this? Failure I'm defining as not just reaching the point where say you don't hit a target anymore or say you, you know, I don't know. We talked about with strength training how failure is not you get pinned by the bar. It's like technique breaks down or maybe if you're using a bar tractor like velocity goes down or something like that. I mean like A workout where you start it, you don't think you're going to make it, and then on repetition three of four, three of four for this interval training or whatever, you like blow up and die and can't actually finish. Like, you know, bonk so hard or something. And not assuming that you actually ate and fueled properly and didn't just bonk and die because you skipped breakfast and lunch. So this would be doing a workout harder than prescribed or anticipated? No, this would be if, yeah, either it was prescribed and you can't actually do it. Like say your FTP is set too high and you think you're going to be able to go out and do three by 30 at 95, what you think is 95%, but that's actually like over FTP or something. And so you blow up and die and you like can't make it. And then you get super discouraged because you're like, well, I couldn't do this thing, blah, blah, blah. Oh, I gotcha. Actually, you know what? Oh yeah, sorry. Or it's something where whoever is assigning these workouts is like, I want to push this person very far mentally, and I'm not sure if they can finish this workout, so I'm going to make it extra. beyond some normal progression of workouts where all of a sudden from out of left field, you get like, oh, you've been doing two by 25. That's great. Today you have four by 30, like at 91%, like go have fun, you know, like survive. Okay. So that's a very different way of like going to failure than I would usually prescribe. So like I would prescribe like a, like an open-ended, like over under interval. pretty typically something like like sweet spot over unders or like FTP with bursts or something like that. I'll be like, go until you get like a nine out of 10 RPE, like go until near failure. Like it's getting really hard. You've got to dig, but don't like make that actual like day of the Olympics effort. Like stop short of that. Or like, I think I've done this with you. Like do these. until you're like, just kind of stop feeling snappy with sprints or like explosive efforts or something like that. So like, that is like a type of like, like RPE, like quote unquote failure where I, you know, I've decided, you know, somewhat arbitrarily, but somewhat of an educated guess where like, this is the point where this exercise is no longer going to yield the adaptation. So it's time to stop. Yes, and I think that's very different than being like, well, we're going to go until you puke in a bucket because you can't do it anymore. Yeah, because I actually have a very similar one as a bad workout. But first, before I forget my examples for what you're talking about, these kind of go with it. endurance riding at 70% of FTP, like just full stop. That's it. You just ride at this level. And it was really, really, really hard for them. And it was like, I've got to do three hours of this. Like they start at the target and then they just fade over like 90 minutes, two hours and like can't even finish the three hour workout. So like that would be the failure that you're talking about. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Where all of a sudden you're like. You know, 70, 80% of the way in, you like start seriously doubting whether you're going to make it. Like there are going to be times in workouts where you're like, this is really hard. I have to keep pushing, but it should never be like, I could only accomplish this on like a rested tapered, like best day of my life feeling. Yeah. Um, all right. So the workout I had was two by 20 all out, both intervals. Uh, somebody sent this to me, uh, a while ago. And I was like, is this going to be good? And I was like, I don't think so. Then the explanation was apparently that with some people who are very successful at everything they do, they need to be pushed to failing. And I'm like, okay, first of all, as the person who's prescribing this, are they a psychologist? Like an exercise psychologist? That's not the kind of thing where I would go poking around in somebody's mental state. It'd be like, they're good at everything, but I'm not entirely sure that having them fail one workout is going to get them to realize the amount of training and the dedication that they need to have to do things properly. Because I would say that you want to build on success of a gradual process instead of focusing on a failure of a single effort. And that's just where I'm coming from. So I'm sure you've seen a lot of really, really fast juniors who come up through the ranks really quickly and they hit that level where now everybody else is as good as them and they are not stoked on the amount of work they have to do to keep up and get better because it's taken them very little effort to get where they are. And not only just in cycling, just in everything. I'm sure people know folks like this. I certainly know quite a few. Oh, totally. Yeah. Like even, even not juniors, right? Like you can, someone, especially you come from a different sport, you get into cycling and you're a runner or whatever, and you, you breeze through to cat three or cat two. And then all of a sudden, wait, wait, wait, if I want to get upgrade points in a one, two, three race as a three, I got to do serious work. Whereas like you can probably get to three. Like if you were a well-trained athlete from another sport, you can probably get to cat three without. like completely burying yourself every week. Yeah. And then all of a sudden you're like, oh man, no, no, no. Like one, two, one, two racers are actually also all putting in a lot of time and are very serious. Yeah. And you know, to me, it's just like, it's, it's also a lot more fatigue than it's worth to like, go as hard as you can for 20 minutes, take a five minute rest and then try it again. Yeah, and we've talked about this too, where like those super threshold intervals, you generate a ton of fatigue and not that much more physiological stimulus where this is going to be something that you want to do because it's going to, you're going to see so much additional benefit over if this had been a sweet spot workout. Yeah, and you know, the number of people I train now who had been doing like mostly like polarized training, like every week for like, you know, a year or more, uh, no rest, no periods of low intensity or anything like that. Like, man, they, they burn out. And then I've got, you know, when they start working with me, they start resting, they start feeling better and they get faster and their race results get better. Um, you know, they're, you know, they're like nervous to rest and then they see the benefits and they're like, wow, this is actually kind of great. You know? Not feeling like dog shit all the time. Yeah, it's weird. Like, what a strange concept. Anyway, so how about also not feeling like dog shit? Let's give me another good workout because I think we've only got through one of these so far. Yeah, all right. A good workout I have, and this is actually from you that I really enjoy doing all the time. It's doing like a kind of tempo-ish sweet spot workout where you're doing like two minutes tempo, three minutes at threshold, Three minutes of tempo, two minutes of threshold for, you know, I don't know, two by 30 or three by 30 or something like that. And I remember doing this and really enjoying it because as someone who, you know, isn't a huge fan of doing tons and tons of hours on the trainer, even doing like aerobic endurance training, it made it just bearable enough. where you got to do just a little bit and like satisfy your internal ADD, I guess. And so I thought that was really great because it made the minutes tick by much faster than if it was just like three by 30 on a trainer like. and someone please just shoot me instead. Yeah, well, those are really good for aerobic progression and they're also good for, you know, people who get bored doing steady state intervals. Most cyclists seem not to, but, you know, a decent chunk do. I'm one of them, by the way. And also, I think that those intervals have a lot of merit when it comes to getting people used to like a threshold number that's scary for them. Like the number of people where – because the way I train people a lot of the time, the threshold is not going to like creep up over time. Like you'll see jumps. It'll go up like 15 or 20 or something, like occasionally even like 30 watts. That's really rare though, like at a time, which if you're used to training at 280 watts and suddenly you're at 300 watts, like there's that – that new like digit in the hundreds column. Like, you know, like whatever, like the rare occasions my FTP got up to 300 watts. I was like, I can't believe I'm sustaining this. Like, look at that three. Most of the interval time is like in the threes. Oh my God, this is so great. This is what it's like to be a cat one. But it also feels like you're on a tightrope because like you don't believe that that's the new number and then you do it for a little bit. And like the mental stress of it for at least me was very high. And so when you can do little chunks and then you're not taking total rest, it can actually relieve the mental stress of that kind of thing quite a lot. So if you've got a threshold number where you're like shit scared of it, this is actually a really good way to try to do some workouts. That makes sense. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Like trick. Trick your body. Like boiling a frog, right? That's the old. Yeah, yeah, exactly. And never mind. So I'll, all right, my next good workout is high cadence VO2s. Nice and simple. Cheating. I know, I know. I'm sorry. It was, I, a lot of people don't believe me on this. And the people who have done it have been like, man, this is really hard. And then, then, you know, occasionally. Like, yep. Well, then the thing is, there was somebody posting on, I think it was, I forgot what the forum was. There's only like three these days anyway. One of the forums, somebody was like, I did this block and I broke through all of my plateaus before. Did three weeks of high cadence VO2 max work and suddenly I'm like, you know, 10 or whatever watts higher in my FTP. Everything's better. I got a lot fitter. If you've got a story like that, by the way, share it with me. Tag me on Instagram or whatever. I want to tell the world that it was good and that it was hard, but it was worth it. Obviously, I'm not making money on something like this. It's just I think it's good to see that people are putting this stuff to work. Yeah, and that it works and that I'm not totally crazy. I don't know. You still may be totally crazy. It just might be for other reasons. Thank you, sir. I appreciate that. All right. Where are we at with bad workouts? Bad workouts. How about you give me a bad workout this time? Okay. Overly precise workouts are bad. Ah, yes. I thought about putting this down like the ones where you need like a Flanders style top tube strip to like just get through stem strip just to get through. Yeah, well, actually, I remember a long time ago, I'm not going to say the coach, I'm not going to say the person. So my friend was like, how do I do these intervals? And it was like, I have to do 738 watts for 28 seconds times six. Like, how do I do these? And I'm like... I don't know. What? And then I was like, oh my God, they came straight from the WKO5 optimized intervals. So if I flip over there right now and I like grab a random person's optimized intervals, which I have, where are they? Here, PMAC slash FRC intensive. Anaerobic, 36 seconds, almost exactly, yeah, 36 seconds duration, 753 watts high target, 733 watts low target. So then you've got a progressive estimate of reps, 4 to 10 reps. So you start with 4, then you build it to 10. Total time and zone, over 2 minutes. It's 7 to 8 minutes full recovery. So this was almost verbatim copied and pasted into his training plan. Nice. And so workouts like that that are overly precise, I would say not so good. Just, you know, if you're working that kind of stuff all out, it says 36 seconds, round it up to 40 or down to 35 or whatever you want to do and then watch it change as you get stronger. That would be a good way to go. But it doesn't have to be like, oh, I missed this watt range by one watt. So now it doesn't work. A whole day was wasted. Yeah, I once saw a, remember that cult coach, bro? Yes. I saw some of his old workouts and they're like alternating between like five watts, like 255 watts to 260 watts. It's like your power meter doesn't even know the difference between that. Exactly. And so these kind of things are overly precise. It doesn't work quite like that. All right, your turn. Give me a bad one. I'm going to say this was something I also saw, and hopefully people have gotten better information, but it was from an article that was trying to tout the good benefits of high-intensity interval training. And they said to do 40 20s, for 10 minutes or however many rounds of many minutes of 40-20s at 130% of your FTP. Wow. All right. And I was just like, all right. I know this is kind of stealing from the other one where we said like doing VO2s is a percentage of FTP. No, this is actually a really good variation because a lot of people kind of do like to anchor microburst intervals like to FTP. But this is like, okay, so. Just to go back to this example from before, even at 130% of your FTP, for only 40 seconds, like, what are you accomplishing? Even if you go for 10 minutes, let's say, or something, it's not, maybe by the very end, you're like, this is hard, but you did eight and a half minutes of work to get maybe the last Two reps of 40 seconds where it actually feels like this is hard. And if you, Kyle, were doing that kind of workout, you could do that steady power and it would get hard the last two minutes while you're aerobically fit. That would have been a thing that you could do. And then it's like, all right. So if you're going to do something like that, you've got to go really long with it. And I always preferred to... So the fix is to... Whenever I give microburst intervals, like 15-15s, HIT type stuff, I usually say pace it yourself. And then based on how somebody feels that day, if you feel like shit, your watts aren't going to be that great. But if it's like, okay, I can go kind of hard, it wasn't my best day ever, that's fine to do. But as you go progress this workout over the couple weeks, Then you can see the progression of like, oh, you were doing like 400 watts for your 15 seconds on, but now it's like 430 watts. Like there's definite progression there. But, you know, if you like, because I remember doing 15-15s, I would do them for like 15 to 20 minutes at a time, like sometimes after riding for five or six hours, which is a workout that I've given people and literally nobody's ever done those intervals at the end, by the way, nobody. ever. You keep hoping someone's going to do it. I will keep hoping. One day I'll assign them again. Maybe one of my pros will probably do it. But I remember my FTP at the time was like 250 to 270 watts or something like that. And I think I was doing the efforts at like... like 400-ish to 450 watts in that range, like 1515s. And, you know, if I had like done that based on FTP, it might have been like, you know, 500 watts if I had gone to like, you know. 200% FTP, or if I had gone 150% FTP, what's that from like 250, 375? That would have been okay, actually. That would have been very sustainable, but I could have gone harder. And also, if you're not a great sprinter or something like that, like you don't have that good repeatability, it can actually be too hard. And so I'm always nervous to like give somebody a direct target with this kind of stuff because it can go wrong either way. It can either be too easy or it can be way too hard. I want it to be effective every single time because somebody's paying me good money to get them faster. This is a good way to get them faster and make it time effective. And so we don't have to iterate three or four workouts. And now we've lost a month trying to nail this thing. To me, it's not worth the time to try that. Yeah. And that makes sense too. I can't imagine being like, oh, this is... And spending a month just to get a workout figured out whether it's going to work for you or not. What about just doing a workout that works and not having to spend time preparing to do a workout? Yeah, yeah. All right. I guess I'll give you another good one. I have as a really good workout a low-intensity group ride. like something conversational pace the whole time. Even if it's like five, six, seven hours where you kind of have to be conversational pace. I mean, I know people who can try to go hammer for five, six hours, but it's hard. So like finding good people that you can ride with for hours and hours and hours. Even if it's not exactly in zone two or whatever, it's still a great workout. And these are some of my favorite things that the people I train do. Yeah, that's a good one. I like that. I haven't had to do a six-hour workout in a long time. Not sure I miss a six-hour. Every once in a while, I'm like, oh, it'd be fun to just, you know, yeah, it's a fun day out with your friends just to go out. see where you end up and, you know. Kyle, come on. Forgiveness over permission, right? Just go do it. Fair, fair, fair, fair. All right. No, I think more of it's a will I survive? Yeah. All right. So you want a good one from me? Yeah. All right. I have one. And this is maybe controversial a little bit because it's not going to be for everyone. and distribute a FTP workout where you can actually get a certain amount of kilojoule burn in before doing like the last 20 minutes, let's say 30 minutes at FTP. And this is really only specifically for people obviously are going to be doing like longer road races or maybe, you know, extremely long crits or something like that. But actually being a little fatigued and trying to do your sweet spot. efforts or an effort, not necessarily like ride for four hours and then do three by 20 or something that might be a little too extreme. You know, it's funny. It's like I've had people do similar things actually because it's like, yes, it's bad, but also like I think it's not a great workout because it's too precise. You can burn, let's say, what was your kilojoule? 3000? No, I don't think I said one. Oh, okay. Yeah, so I've seen like 1,000, 2,000, 3,000 a lot when I've seen people do this kind of stuff. You can burn a couple thousand kilojoules very differently. And depending on what your FTP is, you may or may not have to ride like seven or eight hours to burn this many kilojoules. Or you can ride like... three and burn that many kilojoules. And you can do it at endurance pace because you're an aerobic monster and you just go through kilojoules like nobody's business. And also this kind of thing needs a lot of context because you can have somebody do an easy, moderate endurance pace for three, four or five hours and have them crush a five minute effort. And they might look like they've just got off the couch and warmed up to do this effort, which is good. Doing that at an endurance pace is not the same as racing for several hours. These are two extremely different things. And so while metrics like this are good in a vacuum, there's also not enough context. And so I would want to make sure that if you're going to do this for the purposes of... Road Race Prep, that you make sure that the work you're doing beforehand is hard enough, that when you get time to do these efforts that you might actually fail, like you can't do this, like physically cannot do this, kind of fail, that you're mentally ready for that failure and you know to bail out. And also that you try to make it something accomplishable to begin with. Oh, totally. And this shouldn't be something that you like have never done any sort of like longer rides before. And then your first five hour, you know, like this is not something that you wake up one day and you say, you know what I'm going to try to do? I'm going to try smash two hours, two and a half hours at tempo. And then I'm going to try to do, you know, two by 20 at the end. Like, like you said, you're not going to be able to. Yeah. Well, I mean, I do all the time have people do. And it's not everybody who's like great at them. Most people are like good, but they're not amazing. Like, you know, I'll give somebody like they can do four by 10 in 90 minutes, just knock it out, feel great. If I give them 10 minutes of FTP every hour for four hours, you know, now we can see all the weak links in the chain. Like somebody's hydration isn't great. Somebody's nutrition isn't great. Somebody's like endurance pacing between isn't great. They're going to hide up hills or whatever it is. Like these are the things that now we can see in stark relief because that last interval, they barely got done and it might've been 10 or 15 Watts below target. And, you know, and that's... Okay, and these are good things to learn. So I would say that this, while I agree in some contexts, I disagree in others, and that's one of the reasons that we didn't have really good rules for a good and a bad workout, because we could have interesting discussions like this, I guess? Yeah. Plus it's more fun. Let's pretend we planned it. Okay. Perfect. All right, your turn. Give me another... Bad one. Oh, was it... Wait, I lost track. Which one are we at now? That was theoretically something that was good. I don't know if you are... Oh, wait, that was a good one? Yes, like adding in, specifically adding in like a set of intervals in longer rides, like not just doing two by 20. Oh, I gotcha. Whatever. Actually, I didn't even have that on my list. That was just a way to kind of like fix the one you were talking about. Where were we at? Why don't I give you a good workout? Because I've got two left with my bad ones and two left with my good ones. I've got one. Yeah, I've got... Oh my God. The question is, do I cut this section out? So I have two more good ones and one more terrible one I think I accidentally wrote six bad ones Let's just go through all of them Alright, give me a good one Alright, one of my good ones that I like doing also because I was good at it is uh like a fart lick-esque kind of tempo fun ride um I have that one too as a good workout um but mostly I think I'm biased because I liked that and that's just like fun and like that's what I think is fun like yeah you get to go around and with or without your friends and just like smash it up a hill like tempo over the top of the hill like roll around a little bit then like find another hill like whatever like Go easy for a little bit, and then your friend wants to race you up the last two minutes of it. That's fun. And then, you know, you just go around and have fun, like going kind of fast. Like it's not all the same, again, if you have terrible ADD and you don't want to do just three, like. A three hour ride with 90 minutes of tempo in the middle or something. That's true. I mean, I've, I train people where they love, that's like their favorite workout. And they'll like get out the fast wheels and they'll go, go to the locals, like, you know, TT course that's rolling and try to like, you know, smash it, like, you know, cover it, you know, go around it like four or five, six times or whatever. And I mean, it also has like real function too. you know it can get you ready for racing it's a really good race prep workout it can get you better at pacing because if you cover the same course you know let's say it's I don't know normally like a two-hour loop or something like that and you see how fast you can cover it the next time you go back you should be a little more fit and you should be a little better at pacing that course And these kinds of things translate really well to like road race breakaways or time trials or anything where the pacing is not going to be even and you've really got to go by your internal governor. Yeah. I think that's a good point about time trials too is where, you know, a lot of times people ask like, oh, like I rode to power for this time trial and I went slower than some dude who is covered up his computer or whatever. And you're like, well, yeah, because, you know, riding to the... The maximal power you can output does not guarantee success in a time trial, even though your first pass is like, yes, you want to have high power, it's also going to be like, you want to spend the power intelligently, dump the matches intelligently. Right, you want to think about it more like you have kilojoules to spend rather than this power output target to hit. That's the way I like to think about it Think about how much energy you have at certain points of the course rather than have you hit your normalized power target or whatever it's going to be That's a good way to put it You have a gas tank and you want to use your gas smartly Give me your last bad one My last bad one is a fairly famous workout from a certain online video company of cycling workouts, but it's 16 times one minute all out, one minute rest. I think I can name that one. Is it Revolver? Yes. Oh, God. And this is terrible for a whole handful of reasons. Just a handful? The first one I'm going to go with is just that, like, what is it actually doing? Like, so after the first two, let's say, where you've blown up and died, Yeah, imagine doing... What are you doing? Imagine doing... Oh, God. It's like I've given people one-minute hill reps more or less with full rests or semi-full rests and with the indefinite stop time. of just like now you are sad, then you stop, which usually ends up around like eight to 10 reps. I've seen people go for like 12 and like, I think I had one or two, but I had to go home. And that's like, you know, that's really good race prep type stuff. But if you're gonna do one minute rest, I mean, It just gets ugly really fast. Put your road ID on. Make sure people know where you are. Just prepare yourself. Get your fares in order before you go do this workout. I think the other thing is if you're going to be following a video to do this workout, you're likely going to be on the trainer, which you're like, oh, maybe short. It's pretty short. It only takes, you know. just over half an hour plus warmup. You think, oh, this will be really effective. But what are you doing? Toward the end there, you're pedaling at 180 watts, completely gassed. And sure, you're breathing hard. And so that's maybe working. You're getting some VO2 stimulus out of it. But you're just like, you have so much time where you're not, what are you doing? You're not actually doing good. quality work. It's just like pain for the sake of pain. Yeah. Well, the thing is like I have like the fix for this and also what I have as my last good workout are 30-30s or like something similar. And so 30-30s is pretty simple. I use it as an anaerobic capacity workout. So you can use the one-on, one-off as an anaerobic capacity workout, but you've got to modify it a little bit. I think you would agree with me that when you do these kinds of workouts, especially at first before you're really fit, there's an element of pacing to it. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And this workout is specifically just like all out, 10 out of 10, every rep, like go, go, go, go, go. And you're like, uh... Yeah, well, when you do like 30-30s, like I almost always assign them between three and six minutes. I think the most I've ever done is like... Well, I've given people longer, but then you don't expect the power to be nearly as high. Like normalized power, which is terrible to do for five minutes, but like, you know, if we look at average normalized power, like it's going to be in the like over FTP range. Normalized power might be in the like five-ish max power range. You know, it's going to be hard, but then you are done. You stop, you know there's an end. And so when you're barely pedaling at the end, and actually, you know, it's funny because when I give people like longer versions of these, of the on rather than the off, it's like, you know, 40 seconds on, 45 seconds on, you know, the... It gets harder to pedal. And so that's better if you want to use these more aerobically, but it's not as good if you want to actually use these as an anaerobic workout. So actually the recovery time becomes important. And so if you can kind of recover and then you can go really hard again, that's good. But we should actually do a real deep dive onto this kind of stuff, even though there's... I'll have to... Dive into another section of the scientific literature and see what we can pull out to support what we practically know. Anyway, so... That makes sense. You want to do it, but you don't want to be... You want the work... You want the quality to still be there, even if you are tired. You can work and get... You can be tired and get quality work done, or in this one, after the first, I don't know, few of them... It's just not quality work anymore. You don't actually recover at all, and so you're not pedaling hard. You're just completing the workout, kind of. Yeah. Well, I mean, it's sort of like if you're going to do a sprint workout, and you want to work on maximal motor recruitment and the neural drive that comes along with the motor learning in there, and you want to work on getting in some good explosive efforts. then they need to be short. You need to have really good rest. And so if you do something like 10 seconds on, 20 seconds off for like 10 minutes, by minute five, you cannot reach those real max powers anymore. And I mean, I've actually, I once had a coach give me 10 seconds on, 50 seconds rest for like five or 10 minutes. And I think by rep three, I was ready to pull over and vomit. and I was fit at that time too but I could just make so much power I think we've talked about this on the podcast before where like I was doing a sprint workout with one of my climber friends and he was like going as hard as he could and he's breathing through his nose me and my other sprinter friend are vomiting in the bushes and he's like what's wrong with you guys yeah It's like if you ever read Chris Hoy's memoir or whatever, he talks about the dark old days when they didn't have any coaches at GB Cycling in the late 90s. And they'd rock up to the track and be like, all right, 25 flying 100s today, guys. Like, what? Are you kidding me? Because they didn't know. And they just thought that... you know they heard that other people were doing this this these crazy volumes and he says that you know you get to interval you get to rep six or something and just be completely gassed like puking in a bucket and then you find out oh you should only do like four maybe five of those yeah well I mean it's sort of like I wish in some way that the cycling workouts were a little more like a gym lifting workout. And I would say that, right? We would. Because we spent so much time in the gym. But in the gym, there's a very... Another binary way to look at the success and failure of your lift is like, did you lift it or not? Like, yes or no? Like, you either got the weight up or you did not. And did you get up with good technique? Okay, great. So there's like that one conditional, like, parody bit, I guess we could say. I don't know anything about programming. I'd probably use that wrong. But in cycling, like, you could just keep going and the watts are going to suck. And it's like, well, are you trying hard? Okay, well, it's great. Not to crap on CrossFit again, but it's very CrossFit-ish of like, you're exhausted, but keep going. And if that's the point of what you want to do, like, that's okay. But, you know, I actually had as one of my, I was going to have as one of my bad workouts, like a workout that doesn't actually do what you think it does, but that's a very vague statement. Yeah. And I think some of that in both training and racing with a power meter, Andy does actually try to say, like, try to put in some benchmarks there for if you start to miss a workout power target or something, like, you're done. Like, you don't have to keep slogging, you know, flogging yourself. Oh, that was Hunter's thing, I think. Yeah, so it was like, if your workout power drops by this percentage, because, I mean, Andy's not a coach, he's a physiologist. So Hunter's the coach, and so a lot of that stuff was his purview to, like, you know, put up the workouts and stuff like that. And it tries to at least drive home the point that if you are no longer hitting X percent of whatever you thought you were, you're not actually doing yourself any favors. You think like, oh, this is hard and hard is good. And that's often true, but it is not universally true. Yeah, I think the trope of our podcast is like, you don't need to work for the sake of working. And making fun of Americans for really loving that culture. I mean, you know how much I work. I exemplify it as much as anybody. I just don't do it on the bike. All right. So was that it for you, for your good and bads? I have one more good one. Okay. So let me do a bad one because I've got two bad ones left. Recovery rides at one watt below zone two. I cannot tell you how many times I see this. Many is the answer. Oh, that's amazing. That's like one of those, like, that's a classic, like, letter of the law, not the spirit of the law. Yeah, remember, descriptive, not prescriptive. These are not light switches. Like your body's like, okay, we're working at recovery pace. We're recovering one watt more. It's like, oh, now we're endurance pace. Okay, great. We'll start making these adaptations. That one watt really puts it over. Right over the edge for sure. All right. So what's your last one? My last good one that I always liked was doing, especially as a crit rider, crit sprinter, doing like a zone two workout, but then every couple of minutes you... Get out of the saddle and sprint for 5 or 10 seconds for a few hours. I always liked that just because it was, again, a way to make just long Zone 2, Zone 3 rides less just boring. Yeah, those are all right. I actually recall that there's a paper out that I've yet to read about occasional sprints on a long endurance ride somehow enhancing aerobic adaptation. I'm going to wait to pass judgment on that until I read it. But maybe yes, maybe no Yeah And I think honestly Yeah This I think goes into the bucket of like It's a good workout because You are doing something You're at least getting in that Aerobic Zone 2 workout that you know is what you're trying to do. The goal with one of these workouts is not to make your five-second power better. If you're doing this because you think it's a sprint workout, it goes into the bad category. Well, I mean, it's one of those things where I think it's hard to get into good sprint watts repeatedly, and you need a decent amount of time to recover from them. And so if the idea is because in long road races like professional cyclists tend to do, especially the ones over in Europe. When you do these kinds of workouts, you are going to be sprinting out of corners every so often for several hours. And getting exposure to this kind of thing is really good. But if you're going to do this kind of workout to improve your sprint power, I got to tell you, it's not going to happen. Do your sprints early on in the ride and then chill for the rest of the ride. That would be the way. I think this is more of... I mean obviously I think there's there's some bias here where I feel like it's trainer season people are talking about like how do I mentally get myself through base rides or base rides indoors things like that like here are a couple ways like and obviously sprinting on the trainer isn't a ton of fun it's not it's not going to replicate even more not going to work on your p max power but it's at least some way to reduce like the fatigue on your butt and also make And I think this also gets to something. you kind of mentioned with the like overly precise like a zone two workout does not mean that you have to stay dead nuts in zone two the entire time and if you go one watt over zone two you've ruined the workout so yeah um all right so my last bad one um oh man I I sounds like you know an emotional one you know exactly what I'm gonna say I've got to give you one guess and you're going to nail it. What is it? Oh, wait. Actually, wait. I thought I covered the... I don't know. I don't know. Ramp test. Oh, is that a workout? I see. I don't... That's why it was borderline and I was like, maybe, yeah, maybe no. But like, there's a caveat to this. Ramp test with only power. Ramp test with lactate is acceptable, but not... Not amazing. Can work. We'll talk about this in the podcast, actually. We will actually talk about lactate testing as part of the metabolism series. And if done with gas exchange, O2 uptake for VO2 max, excellent. Great reason to do a ramp test. To do a ramp test with power only to find your FTP? No. Is there a certain company that likes to... No, I've never heard of any company that kind of does this or has based their entire marketing strategy around this or has based an entire AI platform around it too because they refuse to admit the mistake they made in the first place. I've never heard of a company like that before. Okay, yeah, this is purely hypothetical. Any resemblance is purely coincidental to anything that may or may not be out there that I've never heard of. Yeah, it was funny because you were talking about this AI thing and... you know you sent me that I think you sent me a tweet a while ago where it was like you know sometimes and this applies definitely applies more to running you can be one or a few repetitions away from turning a good workout into like a chronic injury yeah seizing anyone and actually that brought me back to I remember that same guy tweeted about machine learning and you and him had a little back and forth on that I remember I don't know what kind of company does this I know there's people out there working on it And, you know, if there is such a company, I'm sure if somebody's doing those workouts and enjoying them, that's fine. Again, if it works for you, that's great. I would expect about probably 40 to 55% of people to accurately have their FTP predicted by a ramp test. But as we discussed before, this is actually the same thing as this. See, this is why it's like it was a questionable ad. It's probably had six. And it goes along the same lines of VO2s or VO2 max workouts as a percentage of FTP because everybody's FTP relative to their VO2 max is a little different. Right. And so for some people, 120% for four by eight minutes is actually going to be great. Yeah. And also like... I've seen people do a couple of ramp tests before of their own volition, you know, no relation to anything anywhere. They just were like, oh, I want to do this ramp test. I was like, okay, let's see what happens. And they take like 20 minutes sometimes or longer. And when you're looking to find, you know, quote unquote VO2 max power, which there is no such thing, by the way, we did a Wattstock episode on that. I think it was the one why everything you know about VO2max is wrong or something clickbaity like that. Yeah. Where we discussed a paper that looked at people's aerobic capacity, their VO2max, and their anaerobic capacity, and also looked at the ramp's rapidity, I guess. The rate at which the ramp increases versus can they actually hit their VO2 max. And at a certain rate, like in the six-minute range of a ramp duration, it's too fast. You fatigue before you hit your VO2 max. If you do it longer than like 11 or 12 minutes, you also don't quite hit your VO2 max. So it's got to be kind of in the middle there. And not only that, but even in that range, as you hit the max power of the ramp test, If the ramp was like eight minutes, you could hit VO2 max and you could be like at, I don't know, 350 watts. And if the ramp went 10 minutes, you would be at VO2 max, but you would be at like 320 watts. If it went 12 minutes, you'd be at VO2 max, but you'd be at like 300 watts or something like that. And so all these kinds of variables will change everything. And if your anaerobic capacity is increasing, then... you know then you would have a higher end value of the ramp test and this they actually found this to be quite predictable between these couple variables yeah as you might with like a critical power NW prime model so yeah and also the other thing is like generally if you're gonna treat like if you want to go out and do a ramp test because you're curious like like you said that's fine like more testing is not going to make it worse. It's just, what do you do with those test results? No one was ever like, no, no, no, I have too much data. No, no, no. Take some of the data away. Take the data away. Yeah, it's like, what do you do with the data? It's like, if I were going to want to predict FTP from a ramp test, I would want to try to keep the duration of the ramp test the same each time. And I would also want to have a good model of somebody's anaerobic capacity. and where their FTP is relative to their RAM test. And so like you could, so then you would have a couple of variables where you can get pretty close to somebody's actual FTP. Like, you know, if you and me did a RAM test, I'm sure it would end up in the like, oh, we're, you know, 50 to 80 watts higher than, you know, it would be predicted right now. Yeah. Which, hey, I like that ego boost, you know, sometimes in order to sell products, a company could hypothetically. Use something that makes people feel good about themselves and then get them to buy more product. And, yeah, I'm sure they're going to – if such a company exists, they would hear this and cry all the way to the bank. Yep. Where I will not be crying to myself. Yeah. Wah, wah, wah. Turns out. Yeah. So that's all I had. Do you have any final thoughts before we wrap this bad boy up? Yeah, I think that the obviously we hopefully people found this at least a little interesting. We had a little bit of fun with the definition of good, bad, best, worst, whatever you want to call it. But obviously, if one of these things sounds like something Maybe with the exception of going out and doing 3,000 kilojoules before trying a 2x20 FTP workout, you know, just because we said it was bad or just because we said it was good, you may or may not agree. And honestly, for base training, you could try it, but, you know. Maybe not try it. Don't necessarily try all the bad ones, but maybe some of these bad ones sound appealing to you. I don't know. Actually, I have one more thought on testing as a workout. I just remember that Andy Coggin always says, testing is training, and training is testing. Especially with using the DiPikio 5, PD model to track somebody's improvements over time. I actually find that that grows more true over time, as corny a phrase as that is, where... If somebody is training well and we're adding time and zone, that section of the PD curve is going to increase. If we're doing anaerobic capacity work, that section of the PD curve will increase. If we're doing sprint and gym work, that section of the curve will increase. Even though none of this is formal testing, a lot of it's just training. Once in a while, I'll have people test something formally, whether it's one minute or three minute or 30 minute or something like that. That's a little different. Training is testing and testing is training. So therefore, that justifies leaving in the ramp test. Go do ramp tests till your heart's content. Maybe not till your heart's content. I don't know if anyone's content after a ramp test. Is anyone content? Actually, I do know a few people who do a ramp test and be like, oh, I did better. I'm so happy my training was working. And I'm like, cool, that's great. I legitimately have no problem with that. It would actually fall more under the, is this doing what you think it's doing? And I would say half the time it probably is, and half the time it's probably not. And honestly, if it is something that you progress at and you like it and it's motivating, that's great. That's actually a good reason to keep doing it, if it's motivating and it keeps you looking forward to training and riding and racing. Oh, no, yeah, I agree completely. Yeah, well, I hope this wasn't too negative an episode. I hope that we tried to, you know, provide fixes and also justifications for what we think are good and bad. And if somebody thinks our good workouts are not good, I mean, that's fine, too. Yeah, I think that, honestly, this is a, like, a, hopefully should be fairly obvious, but... Anytime anyone on any sort of platform releases a best worst thing, it's going to be subjective and opinion. So people can feel free to disagree all they want. And that's great. I welcome that. Like, yes, this is the op-ed podcast. All right. Well, I think that's enough of us rambling. So let's wrap this bad boy up. So if you want any consultations on your workouts or on your strength training. or you want to do a coaching inquiry, we are taking on clients right now. So if you want to get ready for next year, shoot me an email, empiricalcycling at gmail.com. Subscribe to the podcast. Obviously, share this one. If you thought we had something good to say or if you thought you disagreed with something, that's great. Share the podcast. We love it. Thank you so much for listening. iTunes rating, five stars is great. Empiricalcycling.com if you want to check out the website. EmpiricalCycling.com slash donate for donations. Remember, we are ad-free. We are not advertising Manscaped. We are not advertising Policy Genius. We are not advertising... What else have I heard? Really, I'm just advertising coaching and that's it. Yeah, hey, and there might be some new merch on the Threadless, so if you check out there Yeah, so empiricalcyclingpodcast.threadless.com is where to check it out. Kyle is potentially making some new merch. What's on tap, Kyle? Yeah, maybe got a new fun design people might enjoy, or maybe hate, actually. But either way, check that out in the next few days. If you want to check me out on Instagram, participate in the AMAs. I'll probably be doing a lot of podcast ideas and stuff like that on the Instagram. So again, it's not going to be a bunch of like advertising. I've got a new... Wattstock that I'm working on right now on Fat Max and Fat Burning and all sorts of stuff. Following up in the last episode should be exciting. All right. Thanks, everyone. 