Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Kolie Moore, joined as always by my co-host, Kyle Helson. And thank you everybody for listening as always, because today we are celebrating 400,000 listens of the podcast, which I know for a lot of podcasts is like one episode, but for us, it's a really, really big deal. We do a pretty niche thing. So we really appreciate everybody listening to us, everybody subscribing. Thank you all. Thank you all for the great iTunes ratings and reviews. Thank you all for sharing the podcast. Thank you for donating, empiricalcycling.com slash donate. if you want to do some more of that. And thank you all for the coaching inquiries, the consultation inquiries, and all the questions on Instagram for this episode. There were a lot more because I posted it on like a Tuesday. So I think we get less questions on the weekends somehow. People are riding their bikes. That's true, as they should be. Yeah, but weekend AMAs up in the Instagram stories. So add empirical cycling on Instagram, which is where I got all of these questions. So if you would like to ask a question in the future, or you just want to get a short form answer on the weekends, you can do that. So check out my Instagram stories. And also, yeah, coaching consultation inquiries. That's really what keeps us going. That's the ultimate Patreon. And if you want to reach out for a consult, that is your own personal AMA. So you can hire us for that if you'd like. And besides that, yeah, just another big thanks to everybody. And thank you for all of the really cool questions that we got. Yeah, Kyle, any thoughts before we start digging into these questions? No, it's hard to believe. Yeah, 400,000, that's like a lot. I know sometimes it kind of feels like we're just talking to ourselves, and to be fair, we are at some level, but it's just kind of cool. Yeah, thanks everyone. Yeah, 400,000 is a lot of anything. Like, even things that are small, like rice. Like, 400,000 rices, rice grains, it's a lot. I estimate I only eat like 500 to 1,000 at a time, you know? Without any further ado, pardoning our bad jokes. Okay, here's a question that I got from a friend in a Discord. So this is longer than the other questions, but I think it's a good one to start with. So, Kyle, let me pretend like I'm asking you. So if everything boils down to volume, then why do I want to end endurance rides harder than I started with versus going harder than I should for the time? and also finishing week at the end. So if it's just time on the bike, why do we want to pace it differently? And also, why would we want to go harder at the end? Because, here's the example, e.g. intervals or group ride and then endurance riding. So, yeah, I think that's a good one to start with. Yeah, well, I would say, I mean, to first order, you know if you're if you're just saying like oh well doing the volume generally is better than not so like you know if you boil it down to like you're you're to ask this question is a little bit you know uh you're looking at sort of like second order effects let's say right like the first order effect is like you went out on your road for four hours okay hold on nerd uh yeah okay what's a first order effect um first order effect is like the intended effect. The intended effect, like the major effect is that you just went out and rode, right? Okay, so that's our most important thing. That's, that's, yeah. So, okay, so it's like, it's like a, okay, I got you now. I don't speak physics that well. It's okay, cool. Yeah, yeah, no, sorry. Pardon me. It's just usually a, a, like, yeah, like second order effects. You think it was being like those, those like, the, second on the list in terms of importance or effect or in terms of magnitude, right? Like, you know, the first order effect of you, like, crashing through a wall is like, oh, you might break the, what do you call it? Drywall? Geez, why can't I think of it? The drywall first. The second order effect was like, oh, maybe some of the 2x4s got damaged. But the first order effect is definitely like, you like Kool-Aid manned your way through that drywall. I think you would get broken on the 2x4s first. Yeah, exactly. Having fallen through a couple walls in my time as a carpenter, it definitely happens. Ceiling's actually more often than walls. Yeah, so volume being the biggest thing. So then I think the question becomes, well, I think there's two things here. The first thing, is that, you know, why would you want to pace it negative versus positive, right? And I think that the answer here is that when you negative split an endurance ride, at no point are you riding harder than you can reasonably sustain, right? kind of the cellular reasoning behind burning carbohydrates and burning fats, right? So if we're going to, as we ride also, lipolysis is increasingly stimulated. So one of the factors that limits fat oxidation is how much do you have in the bloodstream, right? It's like a concentration gradient. We have more on one side, there's going to be more that gets through. So as you ride, you have more fats later. And so as you have more fat availability, you can burn some more for sure. And also your body gets more stimulated in terms of hormonal effects. And so later you can typically produce more power for the same heart rate and the same RPE. And if you push hard earlier, like when you're not quite warmed up and you're not quite ready to go, you can actually chew through your glycogen stores really fast. and so that leads to shortening the ride because you're fatigued and you've got to crawl your way to your local gas station or coffee shop and like you know lie on the ground while somebody stomps muffins into your mouth yeah where's that Duncan it's just over the hill I swear it's just just a little bit farther I have been on those rides they are not fun so if you pace it then you are in a better position to do more riding. That's the first thing to think about. I think the second thing is that these days I'm hearing more people say, oh I think the common wisdom these days is you should always do your harder efforts later into the ride. And the answer is yes and also no, obviously. So I think you can do your efforts whenever you want in the ride. It doesn't matter because obviously if you do some hard efforts, you're going to have a lot of lactate. You're going to increase sympathetic nervous system and catecholamines and all that kind of stuff. It doesn't matter. It's irrelevant as far as I know. And as far as I know, especially with cellular adaptation signaling, it's definitely irrelevant. So one of the things that happens is I think a lot of... Interval sets and things like group rides and stuff like that should be done early when you are fresh and you can produce a lot of power. Yeah. Later on, it gets more race-specific. Right. And I just want to point out, too, negative splitting and endurance ride does not mean the first half you ride at like... one watt over zone one and then the second half you're like one watt below zone three right like it's not it's not like a 50% jump like oh man you know it's it's being a little conservative and then like opening it up a little but still not like punching your buds in the face on a group ride hard at the end on the second half or whatever yeah yeah no it's yeah so like and I think because this is why I assign endurance rides by RPE because people who are really, really experienced, people who are really well trained can typically ride easy for anywhere from 5 to 20 minutes and suddenly they're at their normal endurance pace, like they're at the same wattage, same heart rate that they've always done and there it is and they warm up like that and they're not going to add power as they go, they're just going to feel the same throughout. Some others? and maybe feel stronger as they go. In my experience, it's people who typically don't ride as much. And so if you start easier and you feel that same RPE and later on in the ride, you're probably going to feel the same RPE for higher power. And that's fine too. There's really no wrong way to do it as long as you're getting back from your endurance rides, not feeling dead. And of course... One of the signals that we're going to look at for adaptation is actually muscle glycogen. I've got a lot of papers to read on this kind of stuff, but there's some really interesting data out there, and I'm looking forward to getting into it. But preliminary data, I think I may have mentioned this in the last Wattstock, but I don't remember if I did. One of the reasons that they were measuring muscle glycogen, they got some preliminary data that shows that lower muscle glycogen for end exercise may actually be related to an increased AMPK signaling, aerobic signaling. In which case, and if that's true, this might be one of the mechanisms for quote-unquote training low. It does not mean you have to do the keto or anything like that. but so if you like deplete your glycogen stores to some degree and then you do an endurance ride that should provide greater adaptive stimulus than if you do it the opposite way because if you've got to do via to max intervals and you can't really push via to max 100% or sprints 100% at the end of your five six hour ride then they're not going to be as effective as if you did them at the start so there's a lot of stuff in here and I don't have any recommendations on any of this stuff done some experimenting with folks but yeah I think it's probably a really, really interesting area of research. And yeah, we will definitely be doing some podcasts on this in the future. Okay, cool. So question two, have you listened to the Rich Roll Norwegian Tripod? Tripod or triathlon podcast? Does a tripod make any noise? Do I have any thoughts? I guess it was falling over, yeah. Yeah. And am I their coach with the pen name? I've never heard of this, so therefore I cannot be their coach with the pen name. Also, I don't know anything about- So close to Rickroll, too. Yeah, I guess? I don't know. Yeah, I have no idea. So, I guess not. How true is it that fasted training teaches your body to use more fats? Well, Kyle, I know you know this one. We just talked about this, bro. Yeah, like four episodes in the last like 10. Yeah. So technically, yes. Does it actually lead to performance improvements? No. That's the key thing. Like, yeah, you burn more, well, you said it before, but you burn more fat because that's what you have, not because you're, you know, you've unlocked, you've hacked your metabolism. Yeah, if you want to hack your metabolism, well, I would suggest to use some of the drugs that they use in metabolic, or not metabolic, yeah, metabolic testing of isolated mitochondria. which do various things like they get rid of the proton gradient from the inner mitochondrial membrane. Oh no. Yeah, fun stuff like that. So that's a true hacking of metabolism. So I refer you to the last episode, Wastock 40, and I also refer you to the episode, Why Keto Is Not The Diet You're Looking For. That goes into the Louise Burke study on... keto in racewalkers. Next question is, what's the connection between a long anaerobic effort over 60 seconds and the use of oxygen in VO2 max? As in, I think it's what's the relative contribution? Am I reading that the same way you are, Kyle? Maybe. Couldn't tell you. Okay. So I'm, well, okay, let's kind of flip this question somewhere we can relate to it. So do we have a large aerobic component in a 60 second effort? Mr. Kilo. It depends. Okay, Kyle, how hard are you breathing after you do like a kilo, which lasts just a couple seconds more than a minute? Very hard. You're breathing through your eyeballs. And it sometimes doesn't hit you until right after. You're definitely, though, maxed out, uncontrollable breathing at the end. So when you go longer than 60 seconds, especially if you start hard, you accumulate what is generally known as oxygen deficit. And so this is your anaerobic systems. covering the ATP requirements to push that hard. And now, because recovery is almost entirely aerobic, now you have to recover your muscles to a normal homeostatic state, and that's hard to do while you are still pushing. So I kind of want to look at this question as in... What is the relative aerobic and anaerobic contribution for efforts greater than 60 seconds? And I would say, especially if you're going really hard, like 90 to 100%, the contribution for both is very large. If you look at any chart, there are some bad ones out there, but most of them are good. Like what is the relative energy system contribution over time? You should see... stored ATP stores, PCR and lactate, all increasing from zero and then dropping off at various rates like ATP stores will obviously drop off the fastest because we have to regenerate them and then blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And you'll see aerobic contribution increasing. I think one of the things that sometimes throws people is that because the aerobic system is using primarily aerobically oxidized carbohydrates. So that's glucose and lactate. Sometimes that says to people, oh, this is anaerobic. But we did a bunch of metabolism episodes looking at how those pathways actually work. And so there's a lot of interplay with it. Yeah. I would say a lot of times you hear people say conventional wisdom says that at 60 seconds you're on that border between 50% anaerobic and 50% aerobic, although that tends to go more for well-trained aerobic people, not Jeffrey Hoogland. Yeah, like for instance, I think my aerobic contribution to a minute, like I think right now, relatively, I haven't really been training that much. I could probably squeeze out like 800, 850 for a minute. And I would say at the end of that, I would probably only have about 300 watts aerobic contribution at the end. At the start, it's all anaerobic. Yeah, it depends on the person It's like Oh, you know what's a good example is you watch the 2012 Olympics the last time they had the or was it 2016 they had the Omnium 2, the International Omnium Yeah, the 2016 is when they still had endurance riders riding the kilo, yeah Yeah, so watch those guys because the women did 500 meters which is 30, what, 2 seconds, something like that yeah watch watch the guys do the kilo and they'll all do about a minute and then watch the world championships for the kilo that year too and watch people actually walking after the kilo at the Olympics and watch people have to get dragged off the track and even to like like the guys the podium yeah like yeah yeah they could barely stand up like They'll be lying on the track in the infield holding up a Netherlands flag like, hey, I won. Somebody hold me up. Yeah, that's a good visualization of the difference between aerobic and anaerobic contribution. So speaking of track sprinting, next question is, track sprint any value in double days, gym in the morning, track in the evening, for general adaptation or generally not? 

Yeah, I mean if you can recover from this and you're able to make quality, depending on what your focus is, right? If your focus is like just getting faster, like track speed, like leg speed and things like that, then doing a bunch of heavy lifts in the morning may not be ideal. But if one thing you could do for it in that situation is you're either using, you're either focusing on the gym or focusing on the track and the other like gym in the morning let's say would just be like an activation thing so you can go fast in the evening or you're you know doing really heavy lifts in the gym so your track in the evening is just like rollers and rev outs and you know like maybe at speed like behind a moto so you're not working that hard but you're actually going fast or something like that you know yeah that's pretty much how I would approach it because I I've experimented with this quite a lot. Where do I lift relative to sprinting if I'm going to do a double? I actually find that sprinting earlier and then lifting later is actually much better for actually seeing consistent improvements. Interesting. I didn't really see that much fatigue. I wouldn't max out my squat after a day of hard accelerations or anything like that. I could definitely keep doing quality work. So as long as you sleep and eat and don't have much else to do, it's pretty awesome, actually. Okay, next question is, one change that Mr. Lockwood made to get better? Well, he started working with me, of course. Although he did post on a forum recently. And he said I was a badass coach, which I appreciate that sentiment. I think one of the biggest changes is that he rested. It's like your favorite. I thought of a shirt for you the other day. I'm going to get you a shirt that says, like, this is my fatigue security blanket. And it's just like a T-shirt. Oh, man. Let me know on Instagram. DM me. Tell me if you would buy a shirt. because we do have some shirts up at empiricalcyclingpodcast.threadless.com, but it's really just the logo and the metal stylized version of the logo that Kyle made, which I still think is hilarious. So if we had some fun shirts that were actually podcast inside jokes and running jokes and whatnot, yeah, let us know. Yeah, so I think on the Corey thing, one of the things that I saw with him is that, you know, he was never really like taking the right time off to rest. And especially once you're really well trained, being more rested and being able to absorb a larger training load and, you know, absorbing the training load of however long he had gone without really resting, that helps so, so, so, so much. Cannot overemphasize how much something like that helps. Next question is, oh, no question. Just looking forward to the 420.69KAMA. Thank you. Nice. Me too. I'll probably just do it on Instagram. Block or linear periodization pros and cons? So block periodization is an interesting one because I have seen a couple definitions of block periodization. The first one is that you work in three week blocks and then you rest, then you work and then you rest. So that's the first one I've seen. The other one I've seen is where you do focused periods of block periodization. So like you will only focus on sweet spot this block. You will only focus on VO2 max this block. And that can work too. I've also seen for block periodization, blocking it off by week. So like you will do a three-day block of training and then you will do four days of rest and easy riding. So there's a couple of different definitions of block training. When it comes to linear versus block, I would say, obviously depending on how we define it, but Kyle, what would you say is linear periodization in this case? I feel like that I would say it's either you're either ramping the intensity up over so like yeah like week one you're doing endurance week two you're doing tempo week three you're doing sweet spot or something like that or you're doing the volume so you're you know you're you would be doing like oh I'm gonna do 10 hours this week 12 hours next week 14 hours the next week etc that's what I think of when I think of linear Yeah. Well, one of the things I think is interesting is that, you know, because I've used both and neither is really wrong. But what I found in my experience is that sometimes I think block periodization works better as in a focused block works better with people who have a lot more time to train and a deeper training history. Also at a certain training level and possibly even a certain age, it becomes much less effective. And so I'm always looking at, you know, if we try to do like a focus block of something, is this having the right effect? Is everything going the way it should be? And if it's not, then, you know, we reevaluate. So I don't, I don't, I'm not married to any particular style of periodization. I just want to make sure that somebody's getting the most out of whatever they're doing. Yeah, it seems like it's the sort of thing where if you know you have a glaring weakness, like you went back and you looked at it from last year's race results or last year's training or whatever, and you're like, oh man, my four-minute efforts really sucked. Every time I was in a race and there was a four-minute climb, I got popped and I never recovered. Then you think, oh, maybe I do need to spend a whole block just doing this or something like that. Yeah, potentially. But then I think that becomes the question of like, you know, why couldn't you do this? Because a lot of the time, I've seen people hammer like short, hard efforts thinking that that's the way to go. And then it's like, because one of the other things that I think is probably a lot of people, and here we go again, but it's how much rest are you getting in a block? regardless of what you're doing. Are you able to actually see signs of improvement sometimes workout to workout or if not, at least week to week? You should see some kind of sign of improvement. I was talking to somebody last night in a consult about he was waiting for a breakthrough. I was like, look, breakthroughs typically don't happen immediately. There's always like a groundswell happening that we can usually see in the data before one of those big performances. And otherwise, those big performances just come after you're well-rested. But we should see something along the way that can clue us in. Yeah, hopefully good performances are not surprises every time. Obviously, if you rest and you crush it, more than you were expecting. That's great. That's fine that that was a surprise, like that you exceeded, you know, you were specifically resting and then you exceeded maybe your target, right? Who doesn't like that? But if you're just like, I roll the dice and I don't know when I showed up to races, like that's maybe not good. Oh, totally. Yeah. So yeah, having some kind of consistency, like whatever your periodization scheme, like in the long term and in the short term, make sure that You can actually hit your workout targets if you have targets or you can hit your workouts effectively, whatever criteria you have for that. A lot of people still use power targets. That's fine, too. It works. I typically use RPE and all that kind of stuff. But yeah, whatever your goals are, make sure that you can meet them. So anyway, somewhat related. Is it OK to split zone two work time? in two when short on time. Sorry, it's okay to split zone two work time in two when short on time. Is it the same with tempo, sweet spot, threshold? The answer is no. Typically, I would say if you're doing any kind of efforts like sweet spot, threshold, tempo, doing 20 minutes in the morning and then 20 minutes after work, I don't think I need to tell you that those are very different kind of workout than doing a two by 20 in one go. Yeah, it seems like it is. So, right, one of the components here is that you are getting that continuous, I guess it's not fully continuous, right? You do usually take a rest in between your 2x20 or something like that. But the sort of metabolic stimulus like keeps chugging. And if you're stopping, I guess if you warm up really good, I don't know. Yeah, no, it seems like it. Yeah, it's a hard question to answer because there's a sliding scale of, you know, what counts as a rest that's too short or too long. Like if I give one of my pro athletes, you know, three or four by 20 or something like that on a six hour ride and they stop for coffee for half an hour in the middle. That's still the same ride. Like they're not fully recovered. Like your half hour and your extra muffin is not going to make a big difference. But, you know, if you're spending five, six hours, you take a nap and you eat a full meal or two, that starts to make a difference. It's obviously not going to be, you're obviously not fresh as a daisy for your second effort, but. you know at the same time you got a lot of recovery and that you normally don't and so um so I usually say if you if you take your kit off um that's probably the sign that you're definitely doing two separate rides you should probably treat them separately so try to put your intervals all in one and that can be tough for some folks and I think if you're gonna do something um like sweet spot like if you can do like if you're trying to do like a you know two by um you know two by 40 sweet spot or something like that in a day and you don't have time to do two by 40 in your morning if you do 40 minutes in the morning or you try to do 60 in the morning then you try to do maybe 60 or 70 in the evening or whatever it is like that's better than not for sure um is it as good as doing it in the same go I Don't think it is. But also, again, if you're really asking these questions, it probably doesn't matter. Just get it in whatever way you can. It's probably the best practical advice there is. Yeah. I mean, granted, doing two separate 20-minute intervals in a day if they're spaced out by a few hours is better than doing no 20-minute intervals at all. Yes. Yeah. That is a very good perspective. If those are the options, like I either do it like this or I don't do it at all, or I do these two separately or I do just one, well, The more is more in that case. Yeah. I mean, it's tough when you're short on time and you want to get these efforts done. And so a lot of the times when I've got athletes who are like this, I'll try to switch out their workouts and make sure that if they've only got like 90 minutes in a weekday, I'll give them a set that I think is fully effective in 90 minutes. And on the weekends, Alright, now we've got two longer days, we can do longer interval sets and we'll make sure to do those then. So, yeah, there's no wrong way to do it. That's why it's kind of the same as before, like with the periodization. Just make sure that you're getting what you think you should out of it and make sure that you can see a fairly consistent progression in your tests or in your efforts or whatever it is. Speaking of short on time, less than five hours a week to ride, what to do? That's a tough one, isn't it? Kyle, what would you do with less than five hours a week to ride? I would probably try to do something like, even if you don't have a ton of time every day, try to find those days where you do have more time so you can get like you know an hour or two hours an hour maybe like a couple days like during the regular work week let's say you work a regular Monday through Friday type schedule maybe one of those days or two of those days you're able to ride for like an hour even if it's just like on the trainer on the rollers like do something like just the be active you know like get your legs moving and then on the weekend yeah I mean I would feel like if you're just – if you only have less than five hours, you got to be realistic with what your goals are. And so what makes the most sense given your goals? Like one long ride on the weekend if you can squeeze it in? Maybe two shorter ones but you get to go somewhere else that isn't your living room? Yeah. Yeah, and less than five hours a week. I mean I would say at the very least enjoy it. Yeah. You're not going to be training to win the tour at under five hours a week. If this is offending anybody, I apologize for breaking the news to you. I'm so sorry. But yeah, just enjoy it. Make sure that your intervals are fun. Make sure that you're not – because you can over-train yourself in less than five hours a week if you really try. 30-30s all the time. An hour of 30-30s. Five hours of 30-30s. Yeah, so yeah, just enjoy it. Do what you can to progress and you probably don't even need to take rest weeks per se. Traditional periodization stuff goes out of the window when you can't ride enough to accumulate that much fatigue sometimes. Have fun. I would say too, even though it sounds silly, doing 30 minutes, 45 minutes at the middle of the week on one or two days, that may sound silly, but if you are someone with less than five hours a week, you probably have a very jam-packed schedule and probably a little stressful. Being able just to chill out and get moving for 45 minutes might actually do you some good just mentally. Like I said, you're not going to get a lot of training stimulus out of it, but you're maybe going to feel a little bit better afterward. Yeah. I see people on the bike path if I ride at a particular morning or evening time who are either going to work or coming back from work based on their attire and the amount of bags they have with them. and some of them are flying down the path. Um, and I, you know, I'll cheer them on. And it's like, it's like if I were them, I would be so excited to get out of the office and like, just be able to stomp on the pedals for half an hour. And some of them I'll, I'll see go back and forth a couple of times. Uh, cause they're just like, yeah, extend it. Yeah. So, um, Yeah, enjoyment. Next question is, more mitochondria and larger surface area are two different adaptations? Yes and no. Sometimes mitochondria can get larger, for sure. There are some mitochondrial-specific density things that can happen. But a lot of the time, there is only a given amount of... given size that a mitochondria can really become as far as I know. I'm not an expert on mitochondrial size and replication, but it's like if you've got a bunch of little cylinders, it's better to have more cylinders of a smaller size than one large cylinder. Like you've talked about, Kyle, with having one large mitochondrion. Yeah. I guess there is a like I looked this up previously. I think there is some there can be some conditions, medical conditions where you do have giant mitochondria. And I think usually those are not super good conditions. I don't really remember. I remember looking up like, oh, like, what's the biggest what's the biggest you could get a mitochondria? But they're micron size. They're millionths of a meter in size. So you're not going to find millimeter size micron like mitochondria. Yeah, and you're probably not going to get a blue ribbon at the local fair for your giant mitochondria. Yeah, and actually, one of the things that I had made a mental note to mention, of course, I didn't put it in the show notes, so I didn't mention it. But in the last episode, when it came to thinking about... mitochondrial problems. If you look up mitochondrial diseases, there are some really bad ones out there. My quote unquote favorite is Lieber's Hereditary Optic Neuropathy or LHON. And it's where one particular gene doesn't quite work and you basically are missing, I think it's subunit one. So you cannot... process NADH for its electrons, and that leads to all sorts of consequences. And so, yeah, it's a bad one, but mitochondrial physiology is really, really cool. And yeah, there's a lot in there, and I have a lot more reading to do, but rest assured, we will nerd out on it at some point in the future. Hopefully the near future, but if not, then just the future. Yeah, anything with optic neuropathy in the name doesn't sound good. No, eyes are very, very energetically hungry. Just like a sprinter. So next question, favorite watch? Is it a Seiko? It is not a Seiko. Usually my favorite watch is whatever I'm wearing. But my favorite watch that I own is probably my Zinn EZM 1.1. just the tool list of tool watches. And if you want a really awesome watch for what is relatively affordable for watches, get a Zinn. They have great technology. They have hardened cases, submarine steel, so cool. And it's not that I don't have anything against Seiko. It's just that when would I take my Zinn off to put on a Seiko? Seiko's just don't do it for me, although that Ice Blue Alpinist dial is just so nice. So yeah, Kyle, what's your favorite watch? I was going to say, as we get more donations, though, we're working towards that. Patak. Kyle, what's yours? That's a good question. I feel like, because I'm a huge nerd, there's something about the... Moonwatch of the Speedmaster that's just kind of cool just because it has that heritage. But I don't know. I feel like also as a kid, I thought it was pretty cool that all the James Bond movies, usually some of them didn't, but the watch gadgets I always thought were really cool. Some of those are nice. I think a lot of those are Rolexes, though, which makes it kind of lame. Well, the older ones were, and then they went to Omegas for a while. I think the Omega run just finished. um but yeah yeah with with uh Daniel Craig he was the the Omega guy yeah actually if you want to anybody's interested in this kind of stuff uh look up the I think it was Jean-Claude Biver who did all the marketing stuff for Omega for Bond um like it started out as like oh he'll just wear an Omega and then he was like no I want it everywhere so um yeah in the watch world that that kind of stuff is pretty cool but um yeah anyway um Kyle, what's your, do you have a Grail Speedmaster perchance? Cause I think they just came out with like a, like an all gold like minute repeater or something like $400,000. Yeah. See that kind of thing like too is like, I still want to have, feel like this gives you some utility. Like I think that was one of the appealing things about the, you know, the sort of more. I won't call them cheap, but the lesser Speedmasters is you don't feel bad if you wear them. If it's like half a million dollars and covered in gold, you're like, I'm not going to wear this. I'm just going to be terrified. Yeah, no, I would rather have a house. Yeah. I thought about that for wedding bands and stuff. If you get a solid gold or a pretty high... Purity Gold Ring. You scratch it, dent it, deform it. Gold is really soft. Yeah, I just get nervous. I've got a two-tone watch, and it is plated with actual gold, and it scratches so easy. It's not a good tool watch, but I'll wear it to weddings and stuff like that. Also, G-Shocks. My favorite watches, if you made me get like one watch forever. It would either be an Omega Seamaster white dial or it would be a G-Shock. Just no question that the DW was a 69,000, I think the one with the button that lights up. I got a Bamford edition that that little baby blue. Oh, it's so awesome. I wear that thing all the time. So yeah, G-Shock over Seiko. Sorry to upset people out there. next question when you talk about 30 hours a week for cycling can that be replaced by other sports I think for like base training absolutely it can maybe not all of it but quite a large proportion could probably be yeah I mean there's no I think there's no shortage of people who are like if they live in a place where this is conducive like cross-country skiing pretty pretty good aerobic training historically. And especially if it's the winter and you don't want to get out on your bike and be out on the slog, like wet, gross roads, then doing a cross-country skiing if you can do it. Yeah, rowing per chance. Yeah, if you like being indoors in a puddle of sweat. Yeah, just I wouldn't replace it with a sport like darts. I wouldn't replace it with yeah maybe don't replace it with bodybuilding competitive cornhole sorry what you haven't seen this so over the summer oh you said cornhole oh my god that's not what I thought yeah cornhole yeah oh yeah sorry yeah cornhole not a not famously not probably not great base training but you know like swimming for example like it it If you are good at it, you know, if your technique is sufficient, then yes, it can probably replace it. But if your technique is so bad that you're just like drowning the whole time, then you're probably not getting actual good training load out of it. You know, granted, if you're just going to swim because it's a nice, easy recovery day, that's different. But swimming is always one of those things where you're like, ah, but are you going hard enough? can't breathe at the pace that you want, and so you tend to breathe more frantically if you're bad at it. But that's not, even though your breathing is elevated, it doesn't mean you're actually getting that. That's not aerobic training. You can hyperventilate on a couch, and it's not aerobic training. That is extremely true. Yeah. Yeah. And so also I think we should think about the difference between central and peripheral adaptations with this kind of stuff. Like if you are somebody who can ride a bike and wants to ride a bike, then you should probably ride a bike. If there are practical things keeping you from riding a bike, then, you know, do whatever, go have fun. If you are a professional athlete, okay, now that's a very different conversation. because you've got to make your living by doing this. And so you could probably do some cross-training for sure, but when it comes time, there's a certain time. And usually for people who need to be in shape by like April, right about now is when I'm really thinking, okay, we got to start this aerobic build. We got to get people in shape. And so somewhere between the end of your season and November, like maybe even December-ish is probably a good cross-training time. 

Next question is, how do pros progressively overload? Are they already at max volume? The answer is no. A lot of pros are actually not at max volume. But I've seen a couple things happen with volume in professional athletes. Well, actually, we should probably tackle this this way first. Can you get all of your adaptations that you need for cycling out of just volume? If that's Race Across America. um well yeah I would say no you obviously can't just do volume uh but at a certain point a lot of people who are well trained um can mostly do volume and they'll be fine um but you've got to have that training in you first like uh like for instance um you know I've got some clients who after they take a rest in the off season and then they start a little bit of riding they do a little bit of lifting we do some testing and they're like within like a percent, maybe two at the most of like their previous season's bests. Those jerks. I know, right? And one of the big things that changes is like the endurance and not so much the actual power output. And so these folks don't need nearly as much specific training. Like, you know, I've mentioned on the podcast before, Vanderpoel took like 41 days to get off the couch and get into shape before winning classics. Yeah, what a dick. Right? He doesn't need to overload anything. He just needs to get in shape and he's done. And actually, I have a client who's always thinking about, oh, if I did an average of this many hours this year, then I need to do this many hours plus whatever for next year. And that kind of sometimes can cost you actual quality intervals that can work on other things that you need to do. Because if you don't... build VO2max just by doing volume alone, because a lot of people don't, then okay, you've got to do some focused intervals. So if you're going to progressively overload, actually, here's the other thing about pro athletes is not all of them who are close to the top or sometimes even at the top are done with their physiologic development. And so looking at what limits you and figuring out how do I target this limiter, this specific limiter. and focusing a bit more on that, that's a good way to think about progressive overload because it's not all just FTP and five-minute power and whatnot. Kyle, next question. Would you rather do sprints three times a week before crit or set your next FTP block with a ramp test? Probably sprints three times a week before a crit. I'm going to go with set next FTP block with a ramp test because I don't do FTP blocks. If ever I'm going to go out and actually do endurance riding, and I do occasionally, my hip still bothers me a lot, so I don't really ride that much, especially long or at endurance pace. But I can... find my FTP in about five minutes. It's not really a big issue at this point. I can feel it out pretty easily. So I would rather set my FTP with the next, if I'm actually going to do an FTP block, I would set it with a rant test and then ignore it. I could already sprint. I don't need any more sprinting. Seems like a cop-out answer. It is a total cop-out, but you know what? Sometimes if you're going to submit a question like that, you really should have a lawyer look over it for verbiage. Also, I know the guy who sent this question in, so I also wanted to make him go, oh, come on! So, got him. Okay. Kyle, please, for the next question, name three things that every cyclist should do Maintain their bike, make sure it works, like do regular or pay someone to do regular maintenance on your bike That's a good one It's a good one, yeah Eat at, like eat and drink water at fairly regular intervals throughout the day. Don't just wake up, eat only coffee for breakfast, go to work, eat nothing until 1 o'clock because then you realize you missed lunch, then have six cheeseburgers for lunch, work the rest of the day, eat nothing else, drink no water, and then have Taco Bell for dinner or something like that. You're probably going to feel just mentally a lot better, especially if you have to go train later, is if you get both water, actual water, not just the water and coffee, and food at semi-regular intervals throughout the day. And more than just once, right? So the basics, you're saying, like, work on the basics, like maintain your bike, eat and sleep well, and, I don't know, ride your bike? Yeah, I feel like those are the free things that are... pretty easy. I know that I certainly get this way too. I get focused on work and I realize I haven't eaten or drank or, you know, go get a snack. But then, you know, instead of like once you have that realization, like get up and go do the thing, you know, like take five minutes or whatever. Yeah. Don't sit there and go, oh, I'm going to finish this thing because it's not going to be five minutes. It's going to be an hour. And by the way, that is also another good case to actually wear a watch is because if you're somebody like that, like I'm like this, like, um having a visual representation of the passage of time helps a lot um and especially something with like a timer or a bezel you can rotate to to track time intervals super super super helpful um like uh like uh block watches are made for kids but adults can wear them even though they're 34 millimeter they're tiny but small watches are back in so yeah get a block watch they're like 150 bucks or something like that uh they're awesome get one um Yeah. Dive watches, all the dive watches have the little bezel you can spin because it's important to know how long you've been underwater if you're running unlimited oxygen. Yes. Or honestly, just accountability buddy, you know? Yeah. Yeah, somebody come over and like poke you like, hey, get up. You got to do whatever. Yeah, or have a friend at work or something. Yeah, we always go get a... a snack or at least water. Jeez. Yeah. My girlfriend and I do it for each other all the time. It's like, no, hey, you've got to like, you've got to do this like right now, get up. It's like, okay. Okay. So that was, although I feel like some people are going to find that a cop-out answer, even though it, you know, it is a real answer because I was thinking that when I- Okay, replace your cleats. Well, when I read that question- If you think you need to replace your cleats, replace them. Yeah. My brain went to consistency in riding. Eating Well and Sleeping Well. But I would say the next three things, because I think everybody kind of knows that, or if they listen to this podcast, they've heard it a thousand times by now. I would say the next three things are, first, don't lose the forest for the trees. You can do things like jump on a training bandwagon if you want. Test it, see if it works for you. If it does, great, and stop using it when it stops working. Have your ultimate goals in mind at all times. And if it's just enjoyment and experimenting with different training styles, that's fine. Do that. But know that's what your purpose is. So I would say that's the first one is know what your purpose and your focus is and train for that. And if it's not going well, stop it and do something else. I like that. Be consistent. Again, I know I'm so sorry, but consistency meaning having good workouts. If you're failing a workout once or twice a week, it's too much. Stop. Stop. Kyle, how many lifts have you failed in the last year? Two, maybe? Yeah, two or three, maybe. I've failed none. Of course, you do some crazy stuff once in a while. You're like, you know that meme of like, did you rest? Like, coach, did you rest yesterday? And the guy who's pulling out the sword and it says, yes. And then the rest of the thing says, yesterday I maxed out my squat. Like that for the third day in a row. Yeah, you've got a couple of those days a year, but really it's really nothing to like. gets scolded about or anything. Consistently having good workouts is so, so, so important. And I would say for a third thing, man, I should have actually thought of something before recording. Three things that every cyclist should do. Dial in your RPE. Like really, really dial it in. Yeah. I think like for endurance rides, it's super key. For threshold, it's super key. Like feeling out those thresholds, like I said, I can feel out both my LT1, LT2 in five minutes or less. A lot of times it's less. With lifting, lifting, dialing in your RPE is super key. but actually having that like Kyle you know when you're lifting and you feel your neural drive like take an exponential leap like in a like a set of squats or something like that I feel that too and I feel that when I'm on the bike too and I'm like sprinting or something like that and I'm like oh okay I've got a 30 second effort I've got to start at 80% and then I've got to like dial it up to 100 and whatever else and then I then there's that that point at which I go oh no I've really got to start pushing the same with threshold stuff. you know going easy kind of easy kind of even and it's dialing up a little bit okay and then suddenly or well it's not sudden a lot of the time with like thresholds sometimes it's over five minutes but there's that exponential increase in how hard you have to push and like I can feel that you can feel that a lot of people listening can probably feel that and they're going oh yeah and if you don't know what I'm talking about start to think about it and it will honestly not take you long to actually get a sense of your RPE, your thresholds, and your neural drive. So there we go. Next question is congrats. Thank you. What would you do differently if you had to start the podcast over? Actually, I... I think I might have started interviewing people earlier. Yeah, I like that answer. Yeah. I think maybe not that we didn't have fun with it earlier, but sort of let it be more fun, like less serious earlier. Yeah. Yeah. Well, also I think early on everybody takes themselves too seriously and we are definitely no exception. For sure. Yeah. But also I think – because it was a new thing and I was still finding my feet in terms of what I know and don't know and what I can speak on with some level of authority and usually a lot of self-doubt. And so the self-doubt is a lot of what could keep us early on or what did keep us early on from tackling more advanced topics or like – you know a little bit of hubris some of those topics that we tried to tackle we didn't really do a great job and sometimes we would say stuff that was like in post I would listen to it and I would go well that's kind of true it's also kind of not but fuck it whatever let's leave it in because I'm also not afraid of being wrong on the podcast and admitting that I'm wrong and I'm much the same way in coaching like if I fuck something up I will say this is my bad I am very sorry this is how we will get past it and if that's too much for somebody and they don't want to work with me anymore that's okay it That hasn't happened in a long time, but ever. But if that does happen, I would understand. Because, yeah, I think it's okay to be wrong on the podcast, but it's also one of those things where, you know, now that we've gotten a lot of feedback and I'm feeling much more confident in the amount of knowledge I have and the areas where I don't have knowledge, you know, I feel like it's easier for us to kind of let our hair down a little bit. Not that either of us have that much hair. Right, yeah Well, I do more than you do, especially in the chest area I'm like 60% of Sean Connery Okay, next question is After 400,000 listens, you have a good idea of questions asked What is your best training advice to us? You know what? I thought that this was kind of a different question than the Three Things Every Cyclist Should Do, but I'm actually going to go with, for training advice, like keep your RPE, like gauge your RPE, like work on that as my best training advice. Yeah. It's never going to steer you wrong. I think it's interesting too because that kind of feeds into, yeah, like do I need a fancy smart ring or watch to tell me if I feel bad today or not? Maybe not. No, take whatever you were going to spend on that watch and get a G-Shock, get a Seiko. I am fundamentally opposed to Tissot calculator. Actually, the Tissot PRX, I don't mind. And their Gennaro reissue. I think they call it a telemeter. Gorgeous. Or get an Omega. Why not? Seamaster. If you're going to get one watch for the rest of your life, you could not go wrong with a Seamaster. Anyway. Next question is, how much more focus would you give FRC work for a mountain biker versus roadie? I think this is very much an it depends question because in my experience, some athletes, well, actually, here's the thing is like, I do work with quite a few mountain bikers at this point. And a lot of them, even though you would look at their power output and you would say, wow. This person has a lot of top end power. Why would you need to work on that? We need to work on it sometimes. So if it's a limiter, we'll work on it. If it's not, then we don't. That's pretty much the answer. And also some people need more specific efforts to, you know, they just need more frequent connection with those large motor units. Like some of my athletes in Cross and Mountain. um you know need to do some hard sprints at least once or twice a week sometimes um sometimes they need rest but most of the time when they're feeling good we they need more efforts than not um and what's the minimum is what I'm always looking for so they don't get too fatigued uh especially with a busy cross season so that yeah that's where I'm kind of at with that stuff I would also say too sometimes you don't know whether that person who is a cross-country mountain biker are they Do they have good FRC because genetically they have a good FRC and that's why they're good at mountain biking? Or do they have a good FRC because they spend a lot of time working on it? And it's almost impossible to know just by watching someone race whether, you know. Yeah. And one of the other questions is like how good of endurance does this person have? Like there are some very well-known mountain bikers who don't have great endurance. And some of them used to have great endurance. And a lot of the times, this is why RPE comes into this, is if you are, for instance, training to a certain power level for endurance and you're actually riding like tempo all the time, you're accumulating a lot of fatigue and you're not quite adapting to your training load because you're riding too hard all the time. And so this is like that black hole of middle intensity where you never quite recover. It's like, this is actual junk miles, like we've said in the podcast before. Um, so looking at what is somebody's weakness? Like if you've got really good numbers when you're fresh and you don't have them, you know, after 30, 40 minutes of a mountain bike race and you've got to make it to 90, well, then it's not like you need to do more hard efforts. That's the, that's the opposite. You need to do less hard efforts. Just one more set of 30, 30s. Please me, please, bro. You gotta believe me one more set. Yeah. And then if you're doing your endurance rides too hard because. and the Coggan levels say that you should or your heart rate zones say that you should. That's the wrong way to go. Think about those zones as descriptive, but also you don't need to be descriptive. You don't need to look at your power zone to go, oh, I know that was an endurance ride based on my power. It's like, I know that was an endurance ride because I just did an endurance ride. Let the power be a post hoc metric a lot of the time. Kyle. Oh, I like this next question. Yes or no, American road cycling is dead. I would say it depends. So I think... What? It depends? Not on this podcast. Well, if it were dead, you wouldn't be able to sign up for a road race anywhere. But dead compared to its heyday in the, you know, EPO... Cancer Recovery-fueled Lance era, yeah. Yeah, and I would say too, a lot of times it can depend where you live. And even, you know, I think of, because it's nearby, like Southern Virginia into Northern North Carolina. Like there's no road racing at all, right? There's just, you can't, you want to do, you can't do a road race. And so some parts of the countries are like that. They're just, the clubs all dried up. um you know sort of people like to talk about the death of the the club system as well like it used to be clubs would get people interested in the sport bring people in teach them how to promote races that would perpetuate other people required to promote races at a certain point yeah and that would just perpetuate it and you would have a this this ecosystem that was sort of self-fulfilling as long as these clubs would um keep building and keep recruiting people and and that certainly um is way down. The USAC membership numbers are way down. But I sometimes think of this, oh, do they mean internationally? Internationally, the US has never been super dominant. We've had stars here and there like Megan Guarnier, Taylor Finney. People have gone out and done really good things. It's not like we've had a steady stream of world tour riders. pulling on stripy shirts every once in a while. That's true. But we have a lot more people in the World Tour Pelotons than, you know, you might expect. We're not as represented as, like, Belgium, but, you know, we're doing better than we have, I think. I don't have any numbers to back that up, and I'm sure there's a lot of pro cycling pundits out there who will... correct us on this. My impression is that American road cycling is also kind of dead in that if you win any one of the big UCI races here, more for the men than for the women, that nobody gives a shit. No teams in Europe go, oh, wow, you won Joe Martin. Great. Let's let you stage at the end of the year. It doesn't happen like that. You win Stars and Stripes, and your own American team doesn't re-up with you the next year. Right, yeah. I mean, I think the other thing, too, is the... the just the opportunities like you can you can have these people who might be really good at going to race in Europe but just the barrier where if you're a junior and if you're you know I don't know your family's not loaded or something like that and ready to send you over to Belgium for months and months and months at a time you may never get a chance to show that you could be the next you know classics monster or something like that because You just never got the opportunity. You did some crits. You did some road races. Oh, that was fun. Okay, now I'm done. Yeah, and one of the few good things I think that I've seen USA Cycling do recently is they took a national team to some races, some women. They took them to some races in Europe at the end of this road season, and they took them to races where they would learn and be competitive. I thought it was really well done, and they actually got some really good results, and they got some valuable experience. and that was the first time in a while where an organization that has not like USAC has a ton of money but they put aside enough money to do this and I thought it was a worthwhile investment and they should do more because it's not like anybody else is out there investing in sport but also this is one of the differences between the US and a lot of other countries is that the US doesn't have nationally funded sports where a lot of other countries do. Yeah, for sure. um okay here's another agree or disagree uh Kyle if you're not a competitive power lifter stay away from straight bar deadlifts stay away like never do them ever I have hard time saying never do anything ever like that seems there are probably a lot better cycling specific exercises but for some people if you have done a lot of other back slash hamstring exercises you might find because of your anatomy and whatever else that for whatever reason conventional deadlifts like really do it for you and aren't soul crushingly hard and you don't Bulge a disc doing it, then great. This isn't your sport. So if it helps you feel stronger and it helps you feel like you're healthier and going to go hard on the bike, it seems fine. Yeah. If you can do it with good technique. you know I because I actually find that the the neural drive is comparable between a straight bar and a hex bar it's been a while since I did a straight bar deadlift actually because pretty much ever since I got hit by a car in 2020 my hip has not had the range of motion to be able to do a straight bar deadlift really well so I do trap bar deadlifts and that seems to work fine but when I did straight bar deadlifts back in the day yeah it was the the neural drive was comparable but the weights were lower and my back was so sore afterwards. And I could actually straight bar deadlift, even at the time, way less than I could squat. I could see that being the case too. If you are a very leg quad dominant cyclist, then you're probably going to be able to hip hinge a lot more than your back wants to support. And spoiler alert, most cyclists are quad dominant. Surprise. You know, even just, you're just going to be much better at that hip extension and then you're, you know, yeah, you're going to, the weight's going to find the weak spot and that may be your back and that could be bad. Yeah, definitely my back. One of my athletes actually, she has amazing deadlifts and I complimented her form and she goes, oh yeah, thanks, it was all the CrossFit. So, you know. CrossFit hasn't done nothing for folks, especially if you can learn good technique doing CrossFit. Okay, yeah, it's cool. Man, it's been a while since we bashed CrossFit on the podcast. It's true, yeah. I miss it. Back to old days. Anyway, next question is, what is meant by hitting my openers in cycling? Yeah, openers are, well, as... As one of my coaches famously said, Nat Ward, he said, openers are a privilege for the well-rested. And it's basically activation. So if you take a rest week and if you are kind of feeling sluggish and you get on the bike and somebody asks you to do some FTP intervals, some people feel amazing. Like Corey is... pretty incredible in the amount that he can rest. The more he rests, the better he feels in his efforts. And then if he does too much of a warm-up, he says, he's like, yeah, I just don't have the power in my efforts. But a lot of people, most people in my experience, need some good hard efforts to open up. And that can be one or two days ahead of whatever you're trying to open up for. But if you find yourself sluggish and not quite feeling there after a rest week, Yeah, do like a little energy system around Robin. Do like some endurance, a little bit of tempo, some threshold, like maybe two minutes of VO2s, then a couple sprints and, you know, five, ten second sprints. That is usually a good middle ground place to start for openers. Try that if you're feeling sluggish after a rest week. Yeah, I would say to me when someone really hit their openers means like they did them and they felt good afterwards and they were like pretty amped that they're feeling good going into this race. If you do your own prediction, like, oh, God, I felt terrible the whole time, and I still feel terrible. Like, oh, no. Yeah, you should feel better when you're done with that ride than before. You should finish that ride going, man, oh, God, I want to go rip some KOMs right now. Yes, yes. Or QOMs, or, you know, is there a non-gendered blank OM at this point? I don't think so. Monarch of the Mountain? an M-O-M, a mom. A mom. Mav the Mountain. Next question is, who you got beef with in the coaching world and research world? Kyle, I don't have beef with anybody, do I? I don't think so. I mean, I feel like you're, like some people, are out there with social media or podcasts or whatever it is, general, trying to pick fights with people and stuff, probably because it's usually pretty good exposure. I feel like a lot of the times that people are beefing with someone and it's some sort of minor celebrity type thing, I always think, is this real or is this a way just to get... clicks and likes and engagement and get your name out there because, oh, you know, a lot of times it's – there may be an imbalance. Like one of the people may be more famous than the other and so then for the less famous person, if they go after a famous person, it's a way to get more press and stuff like that. Yeah, although I don't think anybody's tried that with me. I don't know. Kyle, you and I got beef a couple weeks ago. We stopped for a burger. when I was going through DC. That's the most beef I've had with anybody in a while. Yeah, no. I mean, there are people who annoy me, for sure. But I am a consummate complainer. If anybody knows me in real life, I complain about everything. So, yeah, probably. not a big surprise to hear that things annoy me so um okay next question is hot take surges only suck when you're not a sprinty boy or gal I mean yes and no I think I think surges can be discouraging for people who are not sprinty like if you're pushing as hard as you can and people are like gaining bike lengths on you in the span of a couple seconds I think that's discouraging Yeah, for sure. Or if you feel like you've got to constantly close this gap and you're just like, God, I just want to settle down. It's super frustrating. Although I think if it's like a gap closing thing, because by the way, you can anticipate most surges if you keep your eyes up and you know what's going on. You could see it coming. I remember back when I was racing. I was very infrequently surprised by surges except like when somebody would kind of jet up the inside or something like that and I couldn't see them go but I would see other people reacting and I'm like okay gotta gear up for a surge. I think it's that like the repeated surging can be sucky for some people if they are lacking in either a threshold or endurance or they just need more practice of this kind of stuff or they're tired. You can be tired and accelerations just suck the life out of you. Yeah, for sure. Next question is, what's something you are constantly questioning about your own training methods? What is something, I suppose? Everything? I don't think there's... Is there anything really in my training methods that I hold so dearly that I would be hesitant to let it go if I needed to? I don't know. Kyle, tell me about this with physics because I feel like you and I are kin in this way in that we're both trained scientists and I think we both feel the same way about this kind of stuff. I mean, I feel pretty good about like relativity. I feel pretty good about quantum mechanics. I don't feel good about- But if somebody disproved relativity, like, you know, I mean, obviously it's not looking likely at this point, at least not in our lifetimes. Yeah, yeah, yeah. If somebody did, you would go, oh, okay, cool. Well, that's neat. I think I do wonder sort of for physics, like, what's going to happen if- and this is certainly likely okay so we spent whatever a trillion dollars not a trillion dollars but a lot of money to build like the LHC and you finally got this great discovery Higgs boson we were pretty sure it was there but we knew we had to spend the money and get it right likewise with gravity waves we knew we had to build LIGO spend all this money it would take 40 years and then we would definitely like pretty sure it's going to be there the problem is getting for physics is a lot of these things like It's possible that a lot of the next discoveries do exist, but they would be so, so far off into some energy regime that is so expensive that you might have to wait 100 years of development. So you may have to build the LHC and then three orders of magnitude stronger to find it. Oh, the planet collider. Yeah. So we're in this sort of 10-ish, 14 TEV. A long time ago in the 90s, they nuked this program called the Superconducting Super Collider SSC in Texas. They nuked it like there was an accident or like they scuttled? No, no, no. They scuttled the program. They scuttled it. Yeah, they scuttled the program. And that was a proposed like giant LHC type thing that was actually supposed to be a little bit stronger than the LHC that was supposed to go in in Texas. And actually a couple of the tunnels got dug. They spent like billions of dollars and it got canceled in the 90s. but you're talking you would have to go at least 10 the next proposed colliders are 10 times more powerful than that and that may not see anything new that may just like firm up the data that we already have so you may have to go to 10 times more so now you're right so this really quickly gets to be you're starting to run into serious just physical constraints. Like, where are we going to put a hundred mile diameter tunnel, you know? Like a circumference. I'm sure there's a lot of nimbyism with a physics tunnel like that. Yeah, or, I mean, China has proposed a lot of these things, and then it kind of makes me wonder, like, oh God, like, I'm sure China can get it built, but what... At what actual human cost? Yeah. Yeah. Stuff like that. So I think that's what makes me worried about physics is that we've picked a lot of the low-hanging fruit, and so now we're starting to get to the stuff that we're going to brush up against just a lot of construction, physical size, energy demands type things that are really hard to overcome unless you, you know. I don't know, you could build stuff on the moon because stuff weighs less, right? So it's structure, it has to be less strong, you need less material, but then you got to get it to the moon, right? And that's really expensive. Yeah, it just becomes a really big problem. Start lassoing new comets and meteors and stuff like that. Well, I think it's interesting that you have this perspective because I think one of the differences between physics and training is that a lot of training is actually debate over the basics. It's like in physics, if you get three physicists in a room, all of them are going to agree that gravity is a real thing and that this equation accurately describes gravity. You get three exercise physiologists in a room and nobody defines threshold the same way. You're going to have an argument about experiment validity and training subjects and effect sizes and statistical analyses. It's not going to be a good time because it's the same shit that we've been arguing about for like... God, I don't even know how long. And you're not going to get anywhere because everybody's already got their own opinions. And I think that's why when I had Tim Podligar on the podcast, I asked him about critical power and he was like, hey, just whatever works. And I was like, yeah, you're right. So that's really what it came down to. And so in exercise physiology, Yeah, it's arguing over the basics and how should the basics be done when if you just go ride your bike and you go ride hard sometimes and you don't ride hard most of the rest of the time, you're going to get there. It's like if you overthink it, that's when you really can take the train off the tracks. Because if you are thinking about, oh, I need to obey the 80-20 rule of whatever, then I need to go this hard, then I need to go this hard. entire swaths of fitness and just never touch it. And that could be very detrimental to you in the long run. Or you could be like, oh, I need to train. I need to do all my endurance rides at this percentage of my FTP or I need to do it at this percentage of my VO2 max. And that can screw you in the long run too. So don't be beholden to anything. Well, that's one of the reasons I don't... I'm not married to any big ideas because I'm ready for all of them to be wrong. I think that's one of the nervous things about exercise physiology sometimes is that it's easy for something that you think is fundamental to get upended sometimes. So anyway, next question. What's your sports science slash coaching holy grail that you wish you could figure out before you die? I think for a lot of us, the coaching and sports science holy grail is what causes overtraining. Yeah, that'd be interesting. Yeah, every time I have an idea, I go start reading papers and I'm like, oh, that's not it. Even obscure things. And a lot of the time, when you actually go try to look at some mechanisms of overtraining, you run into ethical problems. No, really. It's like, can you make somebody in good conscience do six high-intensity interval sets every week for six months? Yeah, it's like some Stanford prison experiment stuff. Yeah. Yeah, or worse potentially. Yeah, like what ethics board is going to approve, like we want to push this person to getting robbed. Yeah. You know what's funny is some of the short-term training studies on overtraining, and I'm reading one right now that we may do in the podcast. Some of the ironic things in there is that despite the fatigue, a lot of the times these people have great performances. It's super shitty that you're just killing these people and yet they have this amazing improvement in power output and performance or whatever measurement you want to have. So yeah, it's hard. That's a lot of people's holy grail. because we don't even have a clue. I would say if there's another one, it would be cramping, but cramping doesn't kill anybody as far as I know. Cramping doesn't ruin people in the sport, but overtraining sure can, and it can come for anybody. A lot of people don't cramp. Next question is, what can negative decoupling during an endurance ride mean? More power output for the same heart rate, or heart rate is getting lower for the same power output. Could we be getting warmed up? We've said this before, that your aerobic system takes a little bit of time to kick in, and it might just be that you're feeling good. Yeah, I think our first question, I might have speculated on something like this. you know you're increasing the amount of lipolysis and so you've got a lot more fats and so you don't have to use carbohydrates as much but that doesn't completely explain like you know a potential decrease in motor unit recruitment or potential increase in heart stroke volume or anything like that so because that could equally also explain it so the the answer is I have no idea and this is one of those things that I think about for like a week at a time sometimes. Like once in a while I'm like, ah, I got to sit down on the podcast and I think about this instead for like three hours and I do some reading and then I'm like, oh, I've got to go back to work now. So, yeah, I don't know. I don't think I'm that smart enough to figure this one out. So if anybody has any clues, let me know, please. Write me. Next question is, it's time for you and Kyle to bring on Athletic Greens. It's not selling out. Topics can get more geeky. Kyle, what is Athletic Greens? As far as I know, it's basically just a fancy multivitamin supplement that's powder that you pour into your beverage of choice and then you drink it. It's a multivitamin supplement. I don't know if there's anything. That's weird. I just Googled it on incognito because I don't want the cookies to be everywhere because I only listen to one podcast that advertises Athletic Greens and it's Spike's Car Radio and they get orders of magnitude many more listens than us like per week. So I think if we got geekier and our listenership went down, Athletic Greens would even want to sponsor us even less. I'll be honest. I have never been convinced that unless there's something drastically wrong that one multivitamin supplement is going to be statistically significantly better than another multivitamin supplement. Oh boy, this has your daily doses of vitamin C, zinc, healing mushrooms, and more. If I'm going to take mushrooms like this, I want to trip. I don't want to be healed. So what I always think about with superfood complex, oh my fucking god, sorry. So vitamins and minerals, right, there are these established values that you should get every day or however long and like those are numbers that we know. For a lot of this other, a lot of the other superfood type things like, oh, we've got this antioxidant complex or this or that, the other thing. You have no idea if that's a clinically significant dose of that stuff. Like they may say, oh, this ingredient has been studied and it may have, and they may have been getting people grams of it a day and you're getting milligrams or something like that. You just don't know. And for a lot of these really fancy vitamin supplements, there's hundreds of ingredients. So now you're talking about going through dozens of papers to see, oh, is this enough? Or they hide it in some sort of proprietary blend. So they tell you how much that blend is. is in there, but they don't tell you how much of each of the ingredients in that magical blend. And so it's just, it's really hard to know. Yeah, and there are hundreds of ingredients in this thing. Maybe not hundreds, but like a hundred. And a lot of these things, like, I've never had a bilberry. Do I need it in my life? I don't know. Oh, broccoli flower. I've actually had broccoli flowers. They're good. But I like broccoli flowers whole. and not in a pill or a green mixed drink. I would spend an episode talking about why you shouldn't spend your money on athletic greens. Honestly, I view athletes, especially if you're training a lot, taking a multivitamin is not going to make or break, but it is just this... If you want, it's just like a peace of mind that you know that you're not, you're probably not going to be severely deficient. Yeah. Well, I remember way back in probably 2008 or nine or something like that. I don't know why I got my hands on somebody gave me a, um, like one of those, it wasn't athletic greens. It was like something you could probably pick up at Whole Foods and it's like, like just greens that are powdered and You just put it into a thing and it's like drinking the underside of a lawnmower and that's it. And honestly, I felt better when I was doing that. And you know what else I felt better? Eating salads. I wasn't eating salads at that time. I didn't have any vegetables or fruit. I was just eating junk. And so like, oh yeah, go figure. You get some like, you know, actual... food in that has vitamins and stuff. Like, oh my God, actually, what do you mean? Food actually meets all of my body's needs? So weird, right? Yeah. So yeah, just eat food. And obviously, I know that there are plenty of people out there who have diagnosed vitamin or mineral deficiencies, and that's different. Yes. It's very different. I don't have a deficiency that's diagnosed for dandelion root that I'm aware of. Are you reading the ingredients? Kelp, licorice, milk thistle. Kelp, I eat sushi, so I get my periodic servings of kelp just fine. Reishi mushroom, rose hips, cocoa bean polyphenols, hawthorn berry, ooh, fun, spirulina, wheatgrass, probiotics, inulin. Oh, I've been feeling like I need some inulin in myself. Folate. B1, B12? Yeah, just eat food. I think we just screwed our chances at an Athletic Greens sponsorship. Yeah, don't have Athletic Greens, just eat food. If you need to, let me know. I can send you Namrita's contact info. I'll send you her email address. Get in touch with her for a consult on your food, on your nutrition, if you feel like you need some help with this kind of stuff. And honestly, it'll last you longer than a bucket of Athletic Greens. Yeah, and honestly, and if you do want a plain multivitamin, those are pretty cheap and available at like every grocery store and pharmacy and just, they're all fine. Yeah, they're fine. Yeah, they're fine. Get one that's NSF tested if you're in the testing pool and that's it. So, all right. So, sorry, Athletic Greens. Sorry to see you go, but don't buy Athletic Greens or anything like that. Next question is, Inigo and prescription of intervals after zone two being optimal. Fact, fiction, or just optimal for race specificity? So this has been a hot topic in the last couple weeks or slash months or even potentially years, but lately it seems like people are talking about it more in the last couple weeks to month or two. I have no idea how he defines his zone two. I thought it was endurance. It may not be. It may actually be low tempo. So the real answer is I have no idea. So as far as I can tell, he's recommending that you do your higher intervals at the end of a quote-unquote zone 2 ride because otherwise you're going to be burning too much lactate and you're going to... Actually, I touched on this earlier. Yeah, so this might be where it's coming from. I just put the pieces together. See, I told you I'm not that smart. Yeah, that your hormonal milieu changes. which is like okay you're activating you know more catecholamines and whatnot it doesn't as far as I'm aware it does not change any of the actual adaptive signals like when it comes to like plasma volume regulation and central factors when it comes to peripheral factors I'm not aware that any of these things have any significance whatsoever and I would think that if they really did we probably would have known about it sooner so I have a lot of his papers to still read um some of them are actually quite complex like looking at um like the whole metabolome of uh you know certain athletes above and below threshold basically and that kind of stuff so it's gonna be really cool reading uh I don't know if I'm gonna find what I want to know in there so maybe I'll have him on the podcast maybe I'll just ask him uh about all this stuff so yeah we'll see that'd be cool yeah it would be cool um yeah I'd love to pick his brain um so yeah the answer is I really don't know um and if I might talk to him and go wow this is good recommendation I might talk to him and go wow I don't agree with this at all so we'll see next question after an A event how many weeks off the bike before getting back into things motivation is high zero yeah I mean you don't have to if you're if you're not feeling burned out and you can get some good training in it why not yeah like I would recommend being a little bit careful because a lot of the time when you're in really, really good shape and you have like a really, really, really good race and you're like, wow, that was the best performance ever. You can actually be quite fatigued afterwards. So ride your bike, but ride it in a manner that's sensible. You don't have to get on your bike and just send it into KOM town. Got to use that taper for something. Yeah, I would, I actually recommend to people if they're gonna, if they want to peak in a season, because we can kind of either peak or we can keep you at like 90, 95% throughout the season. And if you're gonna have a peak, I recommend people look at like about a month. It's yeah, like, you probably have like two good weekends of like really strong peak performance, and like a solid month of like excellent performances. And beyond that, it can be sometimes hard to maintain. because of fatigue and now you've done, now you've gone, you know, this really, really hard in races. Sometimes you haven't and that's cool. And so, yeah, just be sensible about it and watch yourself and, you know, doing some riding and kind of trying some different things after a big event is actually a really good way to learn more about yourself and how you can potentially do more races in really good form or if you really do need to actually rest. Like if you've got like a 24-hour mountain bike race. Strongly recommend a lot of recovery after that, but you don't have to stay off the bike. Yeah, just be sensible about it. Thoughts on low carbohydrate aerobic training for accentuating PGC-1 alpha translocation and activation? Yes, I do have a lot of thoughts on this. None of them are conclusive. In fact, a lot of the research isn't even conclusive. so it's an interesting area of research and I've certainly tried some low intensity low glycogen riding with people it has some effects it does not have other effects I would say I would say for most people it's actually dangerous to do because when you start a ride on low muscle glycogen, you are actually quite close to having a very severe bonk. Yeah, you gotta feather that throttle. Yeah, you need to be really, really careful with this stuff. And also, off the bike, like doing low carb diet stuff, fucking sucks. It is not fun. Like, oh, I'm gonna get home for my ride and I'm gonna eat salami and cheese. Where's the carbs? Also, sometimes you get some... pretty bad mental fog from low-carb stuff because shocker, your brain likes sugar and is unhappy when you're like, oh, no sugar for you. And so you may just feel bad. Being low on glycogen for your bike ride may make you feel bad earlier and or later in the day when you're trying to do normal person things. Yeah. And one of the other things that also people look at with excuse me, low carbohydrate training is double sessions in a day. Like if you do a hard session in the morning and then you do a second session in the evening, of course you haven't recovered your glycogen source from the hard session in the morning. So like that kind of stuff can actually, you know, as long as you're, you know, kind of being reasonable about it, that kind of stuff is actually like, yeah, go for it. Why not? If you can ride more, yeah, sure. Front load your hard work and then, you know, your second ride. Doesn't mean you have to restrict carbs either. You just haven't recovered. It takes sometimes like a day, two, three, four to fully recover your glycogen stores and even supercompensate. So yeah, just be reasonable about it. And I would say the difference, and also don't do this like for very long periods of time. Do it for like a day. Yeah. Don't do it every day. It's a horrible, horrible thing to do to yourself. Even better, turn that... Sorry, go ahead. I was going to say, even better, just turn that evening second ride into an ice cream ride. You can help restore... Literally, yeah. ...in stores with a ride to the... Yeah. I mean, I used to do that every once in a while when I got a chance. I would do a morning workout, and then in the evening I would go on an easy ride with some friends. And the second ride, like... It sounds really stupid to say, but it felt effective. I felt like it was more aerobic. I felt like I was breathing a little harder and even to ride easy. But I felt like it was an effective session to just ride easy. And literally, we went to get ice cream and muffins and stuff like that. Sounds great. Yeah. So I personally do not have any recommendations. Like if somebody asked me, should I do this training? I would say don't. and if you are in any kind of special circumstance where you want to think about it contact me for a consultation and we will put together a protocol for you personally based on your needs but if you're just a listener to the podcast and you're wondering if you should do this I would say don't. other than potentially front-loading your hard efforts on a long endurance ride, doing an endurance ride, and eating the whole time. You don't have to restrict carbohydrates on your ride, as we saw in Wattstock number 40. Oh boy. Kyle's reading the question too. Oh God. I don't even want to read this, but I will. BFR, blood flow restriction for aerobic adaptations. Some research coming out with increased VO2 max. I completely forgot about this question. I actually followed up with this person who asked this and I said, do you have a couple of references for me? I was thoroughly unimpressed by all of the references. And I would say, you know what's going to be better for aerobic adaptations than blood flow restriction? Training. I mean, I assume, I haven't read the studies, but this sounds like one of those things like, oh, can you get the same, you know, VO2 max gains out of doing 3x5 minutes instead of 5x5 or something like that, right? Where they're going to say like, oh, you can get just as much adaptation in less time. God, riding with... Riding with restrictive cuffs on your legs sounds terrible. I wish everybody could see my face right now. I am so disappointed. Anybody who promotes this kind of thing, not to shame, TrainerRoad for that bullshit video they put out. Holy fuck. Oh my god. No, really. What the fuck, guys? Come on. You know better. You should know better. And for clicks? For money? Really? So, well, to be fair, I did watch that video and you get with the clickbait title and you watch the video and you go, oh yeah, there's really nothing to it. But then instead of saying, okay, this is risky. There is some preliminary evidence suggesting that, you know, there may be some benefits. We don't quite know the mechanisms, but there's a lot of risks. Don't try it. You know what they say? Yeah, well, if you want to try it, well, let us help you. Just, did you know that you can get rhabdo if you do it wrong or worse? you are basically creating a tourniquet on your legs and if you do this wrong you are going to lose a limb it should be done strictly under trained professional supervision and last time this came out I think it was in a podcast or on an AMA or something like that a bunch of people who do supervise blood flow restriction training for like PT and stuff like that said to me, thank you for putting this out there. Nobody should be doing this without at least supervision. And then you've got to have somebody like a medical professional going, yes, this is a good intervention for you. So if you're just a regular Joe or Jane or anybody in between, don't do this. Yeah, if you look up like... Blood flow restriction has been popular for PT and for hypertrophy training. And if you look up those studies, they literally put a cuff on you, right? But then they... and it's like a blood pressure cuff. It's a sphygmometer and they actually record what the highest pressure that you think is tolerable, like that you think is this is almost too tight and then they back it off from there. So they actually get a number every time of, okay, you're going to pump it up to this pressure every time and no more. So they're not just sending you out there with a latex band and you're just like... cranking them down on your leg or something. Yeah, there was a real method to it. And one of the studies that I looked at in rowers and the error bars on it, I was unimpressed by the error bar. So I was like, okay, guys, this test group size, we need to see some more people in these groups before we can actually get some good data on this. As far as I know for the hypertrophy training study results, they don't show, that it's any better. They show it's probably just as effective as doing regular hypertrophy training where you're not cranking down the cuffs in your legs. Yeah, and in PT, you do that when somebody can't tolerate a high load and you want them to start growing muscle again. That's how that basically works. And so if you are trying to do this for aerobic purposes, why don't you just strangle yourself? No, don't do that. I'm just joking. I can't believe I have to say that. But I know people who have done asphyxiation training, and it's not okay. It's not effective. It's the same as putting on that mask over your face to simulate altitude. Yeah, as you say, those are really popular in MMA and stuff for a while. It's the same O2 pressure. You just have to work harder to get the air in. It's the same difference. So all this kind of stuff, it is honestly just... What's wrong with training? What's wrong with just training? Oh yeah, so the rowing study I thought was interesting because they had said that they only tightened the cuff enough to allow venous pooling, but that, what do you call it? But arteries were still able to flow. So basically the blood return was apparently is supposed to be happening. I'm not an expert on this. I'm not sure if this really happens. But apparently it's just the blood return was more difficult. And so the blood pools, but you're still getting oxygen to your muscles when you do this rowing protocol. So there are definitely different ways to do the BFR stuff. And again, I'm not an expert. All I know is that it should really be done with medical supervision. Yeah, yeah, yeah. All right. So next question is your top five contributors to exercise physiology research can be applied mechanistic, et cetera. Halsey, of course. I would say I really, really like Kent Solland's work and Ed Coyle. So there's three. I would say currently. Lundby and Montero are my favorites. Although I absolutely have to give an honorable mention to Niels Ortenblad as well. So there you go. That's six, so you get a bonus. That's a wide podium. Extra wide podium. Very wide. Extra, extra wide. It's masters wide. Oh, no question, but thanks for shaming me into resting and riding easy. You are most welcome. Okay, we've only got two left. We've kept you here for a while. We're almost done. What is your best non-empirical cycling advice? So non-empirical, I guess, because empirical is really kind of like data and observation and all that. Do I have any gut feeling cycling advice, I guess is the question, that I don't have evidence for? 

Kyle, help. Please, oh my god. I don't know. I mean, I'm thinking like, I think that's starting to be more in the like, that kind of feels like the, you know, oh, you know, to me that kind of calls back to the idea of like, oh, make sure you're eating, sleeping, things like that. But even that's like, that's not, it's still empirical. Like you can go up and look at that, oh, sleeping more tends to help. Oh, okay. I don't know. All right, I've got a better way to look at this. What is your best non-training cycling advice? Non-training. Make sure it's fun, I guess, like racing, training, whatever. Whatever it is, like you should, even if you are chasing results and chasing, you know, podium or upgrades or power targets or whatever, if you're like, God, I hate this. Why are you doing it? You're not being paid. And don't be upset if you feel like, oh, I'm going to – if your desire and love for cycling like waxes and wanes, it's fine. Few people love the same thing their entire life. Yeah. No, that's true. Yeah, I mean I've had some of the people I've coached for a long time have either fallen out of love with the sport or they fall on tough times with either fitness or – injury or whatever it is. And they just don't want to do it anymore. And I always tell them that I support their decision. But I would say my best non-training cycling advice would be don't think about what's supposed to be based on anything. No, really, because I know a lot of people are like, what does my power profile tell me I should do? And I'm like, what do you like to do? Let's find the merger of the two. Yeah, that's a good one. That's a good one. I like that. It's one thing if you're like, I'm on the cusp of the national team, and I think I could make it because I want to, if I pick the right event, but that's not most of us. Yeah, that's not most of us. Most of us are like, Oh, this event sounds fun. I want to do this event because it sounds fun. You don't have to be amazing at everything that you would like to do. You don't have to be working toward major accolades. It's supposed to be fun. It's a hobby. You want to look forward to it. What do you want to do? Sometimes you've literally got to put money in the right pockets. to make a national team selection. Go look at that Velo News article. I don't have any evidence. I'm not trying to say that that's what happened, but there's a lot of stuff in that article that was not... Nothing like getting sued for the same thing three times. Yeah, three times since, what, 2016? I think Carmen Small was the first one to get shafted. Oh, man, we could do a long podcast on this one. Yeah, go read that article. There's a lot of stuff in there. There's a lot of stuff that's implied in there as well. So not a lot of hard facts, unfortunately. It's a good article. So, yeah. Yeah, like think about what your reality actually is in cycling is my best non-training advice. Like if you love cycling for... you know for the like the mind game like playing the game of cycling once you get to that level of everybody's kind of in the same fitness and you got to like work the break and know who's strong like you play the chess game like that's addictive for a lot of people and if that's you that's great if you want to keep doing it for that great if you are all in for you know getting a pro contract great you've got you've got a different set of priorities than somebody who just loves to play the game and loves to have fun and loves to race If you're doing it for personal achievement, that's also great, but know what you're about. And, you know, if you're trying to, if you're trying to like get your first Cat 4 winner, first Cat 3 winner, whatever it is, just, you know, there's a, there's a reality of your situation. And then there's the received wisdom and the received wisdom has a distribution around it. Like there is the average. and then there is the not average sides, the above average and the below average. You've got to figure out if you are above or below average or where in the situation you are above or below the average situation. So yeah, be realistic with yourself. I see this with a lot of teams too actually to give some completely unsolicited advice. It's like if you're a team, know what your team is there for. I see this especially at the domestic elite and UCI kind of level. It's like, what are you there for? Are you a development team? Are you there to give riders an opportunity who don't have an opportunity? Know what you're about first. So same principle. Okay, so last question is, actually, we should have ended on that. I should have reversed these two. Is there any point to protein supplements for endurance athletes with balanced diets. Doesn't that kind of depend on your definition of balanced? Yeah. Yeah. If you're balanced is in the standard American diet, then probably. Yeah. No, I think if you're getting enough protein, there's no need to supplement. But if you are not getting enough protein, it's easy to supplement. You should. So I will say I have had... A handful of people ask is probably because I lift a lot and they think, oh, you know, a lot of the lifting words of wisdom is a gram of protein per pound of body weight per day, which for a lot of people is quite difficult. And for a lot of people, that's way more than they need. Like that number comes from people doing strict... hypertrophy training trying to say how much protein do I need to eat every day so that I am 100% guaranteed that lack of protein is not the reason why my delts don't look like death stars coming out of my arms. So if you're doing endurance training, you're usually not looking to gain just like as much muscle mass as possible. So that's probably more than you need. almost certainly more than you need. Having tried this before when I'm in a lot of lifting and a lot of strength work or hypertrophy work, it's difficult. Even if you're like me and you like eating meat, it's a lot. I would have to eat almost 200 grams of protein a day, which is a lot. That is so many chicken thighs. right yeah yeah it's like so much meat it's it's like oh god it's like it's like probably what like two or three pounds of like ground beef something like that yeah it's like it's like six chicken breasts a day or something like that right like yeah and that's where people use protein supplements because you just you just don't want to eat six chicken breasts like I ate you know or like 12 egg whites or something Just bonkers. Yeah. The egg whites one is like whenever I'm doing the egg whites thing, which I don't do often, it'll be like two or three whole eggs for me and like that's about all I need for fats for that meal. And then I'll supplement the rest with egg whites and it's like 200, 250 grams of egg whites on top of like three whole eggs. It's a pile of food. It's like you get – when I do that with egg whites, I'll buy it by like the quart, right, in the store so you don't have to separate them out. But yeah, you pour in like a half a cup or a cup of egg whites. It's so much because a lot of it's water and it fluffs up. But like – Yeah. Yeah, it's a lot. And so typically I think the regular recommendation for endurance athletes is about 1.5 grams of protein per kilogram of body weight. So if you're 70 kilos, you should be looking at about 105 grams? Did I do that right? 1.5 per kilo? Yeah. Yeah, that's like 105. Wow, that's maybe the second time I've ever done math right on the podcast. So a lot of firsts today. So that's typically about what you need. Because the thing is, I've talked to a lot of people where the carbs are such a focus and people won't eat any kind of real large dose of protein until later in the day. And if you're looking at just the regular metabolic process of adaptation, Adaptation is similar to gaining muscle, but it's not at all the same. Adaptation in cycling is making new mitochondria, making new transporters, more MCT transporters, more glucose transporters, more fat transporters. It can also be making new capillaries. It can be increasing plasma volume. like metabolic work needs to be done to do all this stuff. Like for instance, when I was reading the Hans Krebs autobiography, I was one of the most fascinating things I learned is how they did the experiments back then. And, you know, experiments are done similarly for some types of things, but, you know, they're more elegant machines now, but they had, God, I don't even know how to pronounce it, but they had these machines that would basically measure oxygen consumption. and so in discovering this not citrate cycle the urea cycle what they would do is they would take very thin slices like translucent slices of like pigeon liver or something like that or kidney and they would put it like you know lie in the bottom of a little tube or a little beaker and then they would add in certain things and they would watch the oxygen in the tube go down because consumption of oxygen meant the metabolic process that you're looking for is happening or some kind of process is happening. Then you look at what kind of products do we have now? And so that's one of the ways that they like sussed out how all that stuff worked. And it was a long labor intensive process. Nowadays, that kind of stuff would be fairly easy to do. Well, comparatively anyway. And so that is an example of metabolic processes working consumes oxygen because you need energy. And so it also consumes substrates. So you would need to have some kind of fuel in there to be consumed. And so that's the kind of thing that we're looking at with adaptation. And that's one of the reasons that you need to have protein because making new proteins takes oxygen. And if you can see... oxygen consumption happening just for the body making urea. Like imagine what it takes to make a whole bunch of new proteins in the largest muscles in your body, in your legs. Yeah, it's a lot. It's huge. Like that food that you eat literally then stays with you, right? Yeah. And it doesn't mean that you're going to be gaining kilos on kilos like a bodybuilder. Although a lot of the times, sometimes when people actually rest and eat enough and they adapt, a couple of kilos do go on the body because now you have glycogen stores. Now you've got plasma volume again. These are things that are good adaptations. This is a good kind of weight. And actually, Namrita and I should sit down and have an episode on this kind of stuff soon. because it seems somewhat timely. So yeah, so you don't really need protein supplements, but you do need protein. So supplementing is frequently one of the best ways to make sure that you are getting enough. Like I've got to eat something like 180 to 200 grams of protein a day pretty much all the time to keep my giant quads around. I more often than not will actually reach for the protein powder like two meals a day out of four sometimes three but usually I try to keep to like two so yeah you've got to get it in and if you're not then hit up Namrita for a consult that's all our questions Kyle any concluding thoughts were there any themes in these questions that you noticed today? It looks like there are a couple, there are definitely some themes about touching on topics that were related to the last few metabolism episodes and talking about glycogen and fat and training and stuff like that. So I thought that was cool. That means you were actually getting good engagement and people. are listening to the content and liking it enough to say, hey, what about this? Which is pretty cool. It kind of reminds me of like if you've ever had to teach a class or something, if you get no response and no one has any questions for you, you're like, did I botch that? Do these blank stares don't really tell me anything? So that's nice. That's always nice to hear that and be like, oh, people actually, you know. are paying attention and absorbing it and enjoying the content. So I appreciate that. And I also appreciate the sort of less serious questions too. Because like you said, you know, it took a little bit of time, but it is always nice. I think it's always nice to not take yourself too seriously and have fun with it. Yeah, no, I agree fully. Yeah. Well, I think it's, well, one of the other things I've noticed is that I think over time, the questions have kind of shifted in nature too. You know, because I think maybe two or three years ago, we would have been getting questions like, how do I best train VO2max? How do I best train FTP? Like, our regular listeners, and we have a lot now, and we love all of you. You know, all of you all know that kind of stuff now, or you've at least experimented with it, and you've got a method that works for you, even if it's not the method that I find works for people, because... Again, I'm always testing different methods because I never know what's going to work. And I always like to see what comes out the other side when we put training into somebody. And every time I do a consultation for a listener, a regular listener, a lot of the questions are fantastic. We don't spend as much time doing things like covering basics. We spend a lot of time really getting down into what matters for that person specifically and in their specific cases. I don't have to do as much, oh, this is why this happens, this is why this happens. We've already got a common language and a common set of ideas, and that's really fantastic. I'm like, oh, okay, before we do this consult, I got one coming up tomorrow. I said, give me an outline of your plan for this race that you've got coming up. See the plan, a couple things to work on, but I'm like, man, this person really, really listens. And it's flattering to see that. it really is because I'm just a guy in a room with a microphone and it's kind of taupe in here there's nothing special going on it's really weird you know it's taupe I don't have any jerseys hanging up on the wall even though people have sent me jerseys over the years but yeah it's fantastic thanks everybody for listening we really appreciate it We appreciate all the donations over the last 400,000 listens. You keep all the lights on. Yeah, you keep us in burritos. You keep the hosting fees covered. You keep the, you know, I have a microphone and a nice inline compressor. Thanks to the listeners. So, yeah, thanks, everybody. Yeah, thanks, everyone. Can't thank you enough. So all the usual stuff. Subscribe to the podcast. Of course, iTunes rating. If you have not yet given us a five-star iTunes rating, apparently it does help, I'm told. So that is really appreciated. If you haven't given us a nice review, we really appreciate those too. I think Kyle once got called Big Space Boy, all in caps. That still makes me laugh. Just going to get a shirt with that printed on a business card. You can call me. Yeah, and remember, of course, the podcast is free. We want it this way, and I don't like to push the advertising too hard. So we just bookend the show with it. So if you want to reach out for a coaching inquiry, please shoot me an email, empiricalcyclingatgmail.com. We are taking on athletes all the time. We do discount rates or negotiable for students and professional athletes and anybody with extenuating circumstances, of course. and if you are interested in having your own AMA with me or Fabiano, we are the two who typically do the consultations, shoot me an email empiricalcycling at gmail.com and you can get your own AMA in form of a consultation. So if you have any other things that you think of, I just want to send me a comment or say hi, shoot me a DM on Instagram. I think I've missed a couple over the last couple months I apologize for that but I get to almost all of them so and of course the Weekend AMA is up on Instagram stories give me a follow there at Empirical Cycling because that's where we get all of our questions for podcasts just like this so we will see you all next time and I've got a couple interviews lined up and we're going to get back into some more Wattstock stuff and I think the next Wattstock is going to be size versus power Kyle what do you think? Sound good? Yeah Awesome. Maximum size. All right. Bye, everybody. See ya. All right. So, Kyle, our last AMA question is actually from a lot of listeners because I shut you down in our last podcast episode when you started describing how wires actually conduct electricity because it's not the actual flow of the electrons themselves, right? So I wanted to give you a chance to, and everybody listening, now you get to hear Kyle's explanation for this finally. Yeah, so people think that it's the electrons, right, that flow through wires. Electrons do flow through wires, but they think that the electrons are what is transmitting. the power and then they do like you said you actually can do a calculation of how fast are the electrons drifting through a copper wire when you turn the light switch on and it's actually very very very slow and even if you think oh well maybe this electron doesn't have to get from the switch to the light bulb it's going to bump into the next one bump into the next one bump into the next one it's still not as fast like you turn on that light switch and it's bam it looks instantaneous right it actually happens at the speed of light but what is happening is The electromagnetic fields are carrying the energy. There's this thing called the pointing vector. It's spelled P-O-Y-N-T-I-N-G. So it's actually not like a pointing. It's not like the right-hand rule of pointing this way and curl your fingers. Right. It's actually named after John Pointing. I'm not kidding. That's his name. His name is John Pointing. derived it in the 1800s, like in the heyday of classical electromagnetics. But it's a vector, and if you take the electric field vector and you take the cross product of it with the H, which is not the magnetic field, it's the auxiliary field of the magnetic field. Anyway, basically, if you look at the cross product between something that is like the magnetic field and the electric field, that gives you... the pointing vector, which is the direction and magnitude of the transfer of energy or power. Okay, so hold on. So my, I took E&M2, or not E&M2, I took, yeah, well, yeah, I took E&M, and I'm vaguely recalling the electric field. So like, basically, the electric field and the magnetic field are like 90 degrees opposed to each other, right? Yeah, yeah, yeah, they follow the right-hand rule Yeah, so like, so the way that it's usually drawn in a book is like, you know, if our, if our like, you know, through space vector is Z, then the electric field is up on the Y axis and then like the magnetic field is down on the X axis Right, yes But in reality, it's actually three-dimensional, right? It's like It depends Or is it actually like, is there actually like a just like one plane is actually a wave and the other plane is actually the other wave. They are actually in different planes. And the reason you can tell is because the polarization of the field is actually, we define it as like, so electromagnetic field, also known as light, right? Light, like photons and everything else. Plenty of people, especially for cyclists, you've probably seen polarized sunglasses, right? Light of all types can have a- Yeah, I hate them for riding because they make all the reflections go away from puddles and the puddle looks just like the rest of the road. Exactly, yeah. So light has a polarization or it can have a polarization. Not all light is necessarily polarized, but it can be. The direction along which that electric field points is defined as being the polarization of that electromagnetic field. So it really does happen in like a direction. It does happen in a direction. So what's happening when it's not? It's not that it's not pointing in a direction, it's that it's pointing in all the directions. So it'd be a mixture of all the different polarizations. So it's unpolarized, right? Okay, so that can happen. But like, so when it's actually pointing in all directions, Does that mean both electric and magnetic fields are both pointing in all directions at the same time, 90 degrees opposed? Yeah, yeah, yeah. That makes no sense, by the way. Well, they're out of phase. They're not like – because they have a finite amount of energy, right? So these oscillations, you draw them as a wave, and whether that's actually how they look is irrelevant. It's just how we can calculate stuff about them. Okay, that's fair. Yeah, but basically the fields are what is carrying the energy. So it's not that when you get electrocuted, it's not that it's the electrons smashing into your finger. It's that the electric fields and magnetic fields are trying to travel through your body, and that's not good. So how—okay, hold on. So a current traveling through a wire— is what induces a field. Because I think that this was the very first thing that we learned is that like this current goes this way, therefore it induces magnetic field X and we learned to calculate and all the blah, blah, blah, right? Yes, moving electric charges do create a magnetic field. That is right. Yeah, okay. So how does this have energy? Like when you move an electron through space, How does this create these fields that have energy? Because if an electron is just sitting there happy in its orbital or whatever it's doing, how does that not have energy versus a moving electron does? Is there an answer to this question? Yes. It's kind of a weird thing. A moving charge creates a magnetic field, right? But a magnetic field on its own does not necessarily transfer energy because if it's just a magnetic field, like I just said, if E, the electric field, is zero, the cross product of zero and anything else is zero, right? Right, and so that would be like a fridge magnet, maybe. Yes. Okay. Well, so yes and no, because you can do work with a fridge magnet, like, so the magnetic field itself, like, the magnetic field itself, though, doesn't do work, right? That's another thing that you learn, like the magnetic field on its own cannot do work. It can push charges and cause them to curve, but it won't be able to... to change the amount of energy. It won't be able to add or subtract energy. Right, okay, that makes sense. But it can transfer energy. So if an electron is moving, it's not moving for no reason, right? It must be moving because of something. Something is causing it to move, and that's giving it energy, and then it's creating this magnetic field. Okay, so when I flip a light switch on, what causes them to move? Is it just that there's an energetic minimum and everything's just sort of... following the path of least resistance. Yeah, basically voltage. Voltage is the equivalent of pressure for like a pipe or air or sound. Like we talked about in one stock number 40 in the mitochondria. Exactly. So voltage is that equivalent. Like when you feel a voltage difference and that's proportional to the electric field, people may remember that this is a square, inverse square law and things like that. just kind of in the same way that you can take something up high on a ladder and it feels gravity pulling down on it, but until you let it go, it doesn't actually turn that potential energy into kinetic. A voltage is a similar thing in the same way that gravity is pulling on something. A voltage can kind of pull on these charges and want them to move. I think it's less intuitive for me with stuff like this because in a mitochondria, it's... it's a distribution of positive charge and I can look at it either as charge or I can look at it as like you know it's basically osmolarity or basically entropy and that giving it the potential energy and like if we can you know measure the delta between positive charges that's like super easy to do and so when it comes to thinking about this kind of stuff with a wire and a positive end and a negative end like So this is less intuitive for me, I think. Yeah, yeah, that's understandable. It's also, you can't like pick up electrons and play with them, right? Like that's, I think there's a lot of, there's a lot of intuition you gain though as a kid, like throwing a ball and seeing how balls drop or they bounce or whatever. And even though a lot of it is similar with like electromagnetics, it's not exactly the same. Like for example, nothing repels in gravity as far as we know, but things repel and... in E&M. Yeah. Well, it's like how many years did Maxwell experiment with stuff before he really developed an intuition for things? Yeah. I mean, he was like, you know, there's a reason that all this stuff is named after Maxwell and it's because he did a lot of work in his whole career, right? That's why they're called Maxwell's equations. Right. But yeah, you have these sort of analogous things and that's why we like to say that physicists only know how to solve like one problem or two problems because it turns out we tried to make things look like problems we know how to solve because we know how to solve them and so yeah batteries create this voltage difference or whatever and that voltage difference when it's when you connect a conductor causes these electrons to want to move but that voltage is the electrons moving is still not what is producing the the energy transfer it's that this voltage is then you know proportional to this electric field this electromagnetic field which is then transferring the energy so it's not like for some reason just an electron moving through like you're like oh how does actually an electron moving through it's not the motion of the electron it's the fact that the field the electrons are moving the field, right? Yeah, I guess it's one of those things that you learn in like a basic circuits class because I took a couple when I was in school for music production and I still am fuzzy on how some things work even though that's what it was designed to teach me. It's one of those things that seems like it's... literally false metaphorically true. Like if you operate on the principle that it is the electrons moving and you design circuits that way, you're still not technically wrong. Yeah, yeah, it works. And like, I just looked up, it's about, so a copper wire at five amps, that's a half a millimeter square. So like a pretty standard copper wire. The drift velocity electrons is like a millimeter a second. So they're not getting, Too fast anywhere. But that's because the drifting electrons are not what's transferring the energy. It's the fact that the electrons are... One of the reasons they're all so slow is because they bounce around. They're not just sailing through a tube. They're running into atoms and other electrons and other crap that's in the wire. Is that Brownian motion or is that too small for Brownian motion? Some of it is Brownian motion, but that's actually, the electrons running into stuff is why ohmic heating happens and why like high, why magnet, not magnet, toaster ovens work. You have high resistance, you pass a large current through them, they heat up because the electrons are literally slamming into things. Oh, yeah. So it is the physical movement of electrons that causes that? Yes, that causes the heating, yes. Oh, that's so cool. And so for higher, So for higher energy throughput, you would have more heating. That's fascinating. Is that why toasters are so deadly in a bathtub? I know a bath and toast is an American classic, but sorry to spoil it. Don't have a toast in the bathtub. Yeah, I mean, it's just because there's exposed wire. Those wires are not just getting hot. They're carrying current. So yes, you're right. The reason it's dangerous is because those are... uninsulated current carrying wires. In a way, that's kind of terrifying. That's why they tell you not to stick a fork in the toaster, too. Oh, God. I remember back when I was a very, very young carpenter. I was like 18. It was one of my first days on the job. And Reggie, who I worked with for a long time, I miss that guy. He was fantastic. he messed with me so much he was like I remember he like he pointed at some wires and he was like these are live by the way and I was like oh he goes yeah it really sucks don't touch him like it's gonna really and he reaches for him and he grabs him and he goes ah it scared the shit out of me and then he starts laughing at me yeah Yeah, that makes sense. So to give you another example that you may also be more familiar with, like with AC, the reason that you're still, if it was actually the electrons going somewhere that mattered, then you couldn't transmit power with alternating current. Oh, that's true. Because in alternating current, the electrons are just shaking back and forth, left and right, right, at 60 hertz or 50 hertz if you're in Europe. But if they're only moving a millimeter a second or so, then each time they're only moving back and forth like a millimeter or two. So, yeah, and that's because the fields are doing the work, not the electrons. Wait, so, you know that Zach Galifianakis skiff with the math equations going around? I'm having that moment right now. Yeah, there you go. And one of the reasons why they are more efficient over long distances is because they don't have that loss where the electrons are slamming into all this stuff along the way. Oh, so if like, so if we had DC currents in our power lines, so like, so in power lines, literally they're like, the electrons are just shuffling. They're like twerking. They're just like back and forth real quick and that's it. Yes. But if we had DC, then the power lines would get super hot. I assume that there would be a lot of frictional losses. I mean, that's basically what's causing the heat, right? Is essentially that the electrons moving or they're running into stuff. Right. But I mean. But as anything goes longer over any kind of path. Oh, yeah. It gets worse and worse and worse. You get voltage drop. Yes. Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's why this even happens with long extension cords. That's why they tell you not to necessarily use like a, sorry, not extension cords, like a DC, like a really, really long DC cable. If it's long enough, if you put five volts in on the end between two points, it won't be five volts on the other end. It'll be less. Oh yeah, that's true. And I also remember in carpentry when we had to run a couple extension cords at a time, if people hadn't done it before, they would, you know, usually start with like the lightest extension cord, then move up to heavier gauges. And, you know, we were all like, no, no, don't do that. Like, we're not going to get any power that way. Like switch them around. Cause they didn't know that, you know, as, as the wire gauge steps up, like there is a voltage drop. or something like that or a current drop. Yeah, and it happens with AC. It's just not nearly as bad. Yeah. But I think this is also one of the reasons why USB cables are only rated to be so long because as the voltage drops, they can't guarantee signal fidelity. Oh. So what's the longest a USB cable can be? Because I got a 10-footer right now. I think it's like, I think it's around that. I think it's like 15 feet or 25 feet for USB 2. But then USB 3, it's shorter. It's like two meters or three meters, maybe. But that's why they sell like really important stuff over USB. They sell powered repeaters. I've never run into that in my life, but I am a person with a laptop and that's the extent of what I mean. No, it's not a problem. But it's in the standards. If you look at the USB standards, it's just they don't guarantee the speeds, the data rates, if you go to ridiculously long lengths, you know. All right. Well, so if anybody understood all of that, you now know. Give me a one-sentence TLDR that doesn't involve the words pointing vector. It's the fields, not the electrons. Cool. Wait, wasn't there a veritasium on that? recently? Probably. I think I remember seeing that and commenting on someone on Facebook like, yep, this is what you'll learn in E&M 2 or whatever. Like advanced E&M. Usually it's not necessarily covered in like intro E&M that you take as a freshman or sophomore if you're just a science major or an engineer. So I'm talking about like physics major E&M. Yeah, because I don't think that we got to it in our E&M. I think on our last day, he teased us our professor who was fantastic I forget his name but I wish I could give him a shout out not that anybody cares he was oh by the way if anybody has gone to BU for and taken E&M with Calc it's the professor who knows everybody's names on the first day of class by memory and not only that like when he sees you in the hall years later like he saw me like probably two two and a half years later. And he looks at me and he goes, oh, how you doing, mister? And he shuts his eye stress and he goes, more? I was like, dude, how did you do that? So our last day of class, he says, he teased us with stuff like that. And he also teased us with like, you know, like the last, I don't know, Maxwell's equation was a question mark or something like that. And like, and also with Stokes' theorem. He told us about Stokes' theorem. He was like, anybody who goes into Calc 3, you're going to love this. Everybody was like, woo! I was like, oh, not me, but I wish. Nerds. Oh, my God. You're going to love Stokes' theorem. What a bunch of nerds. It's funny because I actually went to grad school with a woman who's now a physics professor at BU. I don't know if she has to teach. E&M at all, but she started there long after you did. Yeah, I unfortunately did not have any female physics professors, but we had a lot of female physics TAs and they were fantastic. All the dudes were just like, well, you see, you don't understand that XYZ. And we're all like, oh my God. And the woman would be like, Oh, this is, yeah, this is a problem that I've had. So here's how, and it's like, they were so much more helpful. Anyway. Yeah. All right. Well, I think that explains that. And if anybody has any questions, please reach out to Kyle Helson at Goddard at NASA Space Center. Actually, NASA has some like open question days, don't they? Yeah, we have an Ask an Astrophysicist electronic service that I volunteer for occasionally, yeah. Yeah, so go ask Kyle. Kyle, what's your favorite question that you've gotten recently? Because you get some doozies that you've shared. Oh, God. It's just, I need to start actually saving these in a list because some of them are great. I mean, a lot of them are things that we're not set up for. Like, hey, will you evaluate my new theory of everything? Like, no. Sorry. but it's a lot of fun because a lot of times you do get questions from school age kids and so they're about black holes or this or that which is a lot of fun but no I'm not going to read your new theory about dark energy I just don't have the time and it also does cut off like you can only enter like 2,000 characters or something so when someone's like going to paste in their like whole thesis on this new theory of everything you're like oh The service cut you off. Sorry, bud. I don't know what you said. I think it's interesting. But if anyone out there does want to do, does have their own theories on everything, there are some physicists out there who do offer consultation services. I'm not one of them, but there are people out there, just like you offer a consultation, you pay them and then they give you an hour of their time or what have you and they'll tell you whatever you want to know. Yeah. And you know what I think is actually really interesting about this like is that you and I both enjoy the getting questions aspect because I think in a way at least for me it makes me think about things in a very different way a lot of the time or it makes me realize the different at least in training the different problems that people are having and that you know maybe there's a way to address that and maybe it's a part of a larger issue that people are having and I you know trying to trying to help people out and I think but that's really fun because I think when you get a question like you know after 400,000 listens you have a sense of what people are asking I really don't and I think that's part of what makes it so enjoyable is I don't know what's going on out there and I want to hear about it yeah yeah I like questions I like it it's a nice you know back like I said it turns into more interactive it's not just two people sitting in a room so yeah and also you're still getting work You're still getting paid to work, but you're not actually working when you're answering those questions. That's always fun, too. Right. Yeah, yeah. All right. You know what? I think I'm actually going to add this section as a bonus after the outro music is done. So if people are still listening to this at this point... You got a bonus track like in the old days of CDs. Congratulations. You listened to two and a half hours of podcasting today. That is plenty of us. So please go about your day and go ride your bike. 