Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Kolie Moore, joined by my co-host, Kyle Helson. If you're listening to this and you've not yet subscribed, please subscribe. We are on just about every podcast platform you could possibly find. And if you would like to make a donation, remember that we are an advertising-free podcast. And if you appreciate the podcast content, sending us a few bucks would be greatly appreciated. And you can do that at empiricalcycling.com slash donate. If you have any questions, comments, or coaching and consultation inquiries, please send an email to empiricalcycling at gmail.com Today we are going to be talking to empirical cycling athlete Emma Edwards about the Cascade Classic for 2019. She went and she raced with Amy D and we're really excited to have her on the podcast. And Emma was also recently selected for the U.S. national team going to the 2019 Colorado Classic, so be sure to watch out for her there. So without further delay, here's our chat with Emma. Emma, Collegiate Nats more or less straight into Cascade. Tell me about how you going to Cascade came about. Actually, was it from when I sent you the AMED application? Yeah, you sent me the AMED application and said that I should apply for one of the races. And I was definitely on the lookout for that application. because I saw the AMET team at the Colorado Classic last year and it looked really well run and I'd heard that it was really well run. So I was definitely looking forward to applying. So, and I got, I really wanted to get this on it for the Cascade Classic, actually. That was my first choice race. First of all, because it worked with my schedule. But second of all, because I'd heard really good things about Cascade. So Cascade had taken a year off. So in 2018, it didn't happen. But it came back this year, I think, with a new promoter and new courses and stuff like that. but it was still based out of Bend, Oregon and I had been riding out there last year just on vacation and I just heard great things about this race so I was really excited to get selected to be part of the AMED team for the Cascade Classic Actually you should thank Kyle because Kyle's the one who sent that to me and was like send this to Emma now Well thank you Kyle Oh yeah of course So why was Cascade your top pick? Well, I had heard that it's a hard race, a lot of mountains out near Bend, and that suits my abilities well. I actually didn't know that it was going to be a bit of a smaller race than some of the other ones, but that was really good too. It was nice. Like the caliber of riders was really high, but it wasn't, you know, these huge teams, huge UCI teams. So it was like a really good kind of in-between between, you know, maybe the collegiate Nats and like Joe Martin or Redlands or Hewlett. So it was nice, like a nice size. There were only... 45 or 42 women, um, in the race, but the level was super high. Um, there are some really strong girls there. So, um, I was excited to, um, race with them. Um, yeah, like, um, like 2020 was at that race kind of like sky at the, at the tour, I think. Um, so, so that was. That was kind of fun to see. Yeah, so they only brought three riders, but those three riders were incredibly strong and they worked really well together as a team. And there were a few other women on the big UCI teams, but just came solo. And then there were a few other teams as well. Some domestic elite teams like InstaFund and Lux. Point S was there too. It was a good group of people. Well, so tell us about Amy D and the process of getting started with them and what it was like hanging out with them for a week. Yeah, so it was amazing. I am so glad and so grateful to have been selected to be part of that team. The foundation does a few different things like supporting cyclocross racers and a mountain bike racer but for some or most of the big stage races in America they send a composite road team basically because it's really hard to get started in these big stage races as a woman and so Having a place where, or a team where people can apply to be on this composite team is a really, really awesome resource for women. And so I'd heard from some of my friends that had been on it before that it was a really good experience. So I was really looking forward to it. And it was definitely like, lived up to my expectations and more. So the DS, Kathryn Curry, was a former pro and she's just not only super knowledgeable but super supportive and just like treated us like we were pros but also was very like supportive in how we could go and ask her silly questions and all that kind of stuff and then there was Maddie Ward is on the All of the teams, she's kind of like the team captain. So that was really nice to have her because she knew kind of more of the ins and outs of stage racing. And then it was me and four other girls. It was an awesome experience. So I had never... Then I had like a team car before and there was like a team car following me, which felt very pro. And, you know, they had a mechanic and everything. The mechanic would wash my bike after the races and stuff. So it just felt like we were really given the opportunity to just like give everything that we had to the race. And also a fun fact, you know, Maddie Ward is also a collegiate cycling alum. Yeah, yeah, she was. It seems like a lot more so than the men that the women who make it like are very successful at collegiate cycling go on to be successful, you know, elite level national riders beyond just being successful in collegiate. So it's nice to see that that it seems like the last few composite teams from ABD have had. successful, at least some successful collegiate riders on those composite teams that are going to send to the stage races or pro road nets and stuff like that. Yeah. So the only, there was only one woman on the composite team that hadn't come through collegiate cycling in this particular composite team. So yeah, it was pretty awesome. Well, did you guys bond over? You know, the collegiate weekends. And, you know, like, well, what's your conference like? How often do you race? Yeah, yeah, definitely. So it was me and Tori, who's my teammate from MIT. So I obviously know Tori very well. And then Maddie went to UCLA. And then Sam and Eleanor are both from Berkeley. So they're the West Coast. collegiate conference. Um, and yeah, it was interesting hearing about what they, um, how they felt about collegiate cycling, um, their conference. Um, I think they said like, if all of the women, like the A women were to race in a single weekend, it would be 10 people or something. So like I, I kind of, you know, complain about our small women's field in the ECCC, but I think we have one of the biggest women's groups in the country, so I think we're really lucky. I think numbers-wise, just broad total licenses, the ECCC is almost twice as big as the next biggest conference. Okay, so all right, back to Cascade. So take us through the kind of stages like day to day. Yeah, so the first day was I think 40, somewhere around 45 miles. It was three laps of this like pretty tough circuit where there were I think five miles of gravel for each 15 mile loop. and I never race gravel and I hardly ever ride gravel so that was especially the first time through was quite an experience for me but I mean I've been on you know a cross bike and a mountain bike so I was like okay I just have to get used to like my road bike moving underneath me a little bit more than I am used to. Yeah the gravel kind of animated the race, that first race a lot. And one of my teammates attacked him was off the front for like 30 minutes or something like that. So that definitely animated the race. There was a short hill in the middle that didn't animate the race as much as I thought it would. Yeah, so there was a late, like, so in the gravel section, it was pretty okay gravel until there was this right hand turn and the inside was super loose gravel, like gravel. And if you went on the... inside you were pretty much guaranteed to fall over. And then it went like up a hill and then down a hill still on gravel and then the gravel finished and about maybe 200 meters later was the finish line. So it was very exciting. When we went down that descent into the finish line the first time, I was like, okay, this is not the race for me. But it was it was fun. Yeah, survived. And I made an attack and stuff. So it was it was definitely pretty fun. And my teammate Maddie got third, which was awesome. Because again, she's, you know, the road captain for this team. been to a few of these races so it's nice to see like her hard work paying off um on a podium um yeah we really wanted to animate the race so we um Anik um attacked and was away for the 30 minutes or whatever and as soon as she got back Maddie attacked and as soon as she was caught I attacked so we like really worked as a team like um in that way. There were no like lead outs or anything like that in the end, but we really, we, I felt like we worked together to help animate the race. I guess how much planning went into that? Like you went out, you know, a couple of days before and you got to meet the team and get it, you know, get kitted up and all that stuff. So did you have like every day or I guess the day before each stage did Did you guys go over a race plan and strategies and things like that? Or everyone sort of knew what was happening and then you just kind of did it? We didn't have specific race strategies or a specific plan, but it was kind of like, this is what you should look out for and this is where it might be a good time to attack if you're feeling good and stuff like that. on the second day Maddie was going to get the going for the sprint jersey so like that we had a plan to be like keep her up at the front and kind of lead her out for that so that was a little bit more of a specific plan but usually it was more like this is maybe how it's gonna go and this is how you should do and and then More generally, like just help your teammates out. So whether that's, you know, saying remember to eat or help bring them up to a good position or just like obviously don't bring back the peloton with the attack, like counter their attacks, that kind of stuff, you know. So it was just like good, like. having allies in the race. So did you go into day two after, you know, having a plan for the sprint jersey, like knowing that was kind of a day for you? Yeah, so I thought so. So I was, I had actually coincidentally done that loop a year before when I went to visit a friend in Bend. And it was really hard, so I knew that, and so I was really excited about it. I guess the second long descent, it was raining, and being from Boston, I'm not very used to long descents, and that caught me off guard. I had to burn a match trying to... get back on after that. And so I didn't know, you know, how I'd feel the rest of the stage and stuff. And with that race, there wasn't much strategy because it was kind of who can hang on besides the sprint at the beginning that we were going to try to get for Addie. But after that, which was at mile 15 or something like that, it was just kind of who can hang on. But I was really excited. As you guys know, I've had some pretty bad luck in the two stage races that I've tried to do so far. So Colorado Classic last year, I flatted at mile three and the race was 30 miles, so it was an hour and 15 minutes or something. And it was so fast and I couldn't catch back on and didn't make the time cut, so I wasn't able to. Do the rest of the race. And then Joe Martin this year, I also flatted on the first day and couldn't catch back on, but luckily made the time cut so I could at least do the other stages, but obviously didn't go as well as I would have liked. I was just like really excited to have, you know, a hard stage where I could see how I did, you know, and luckily didn't flat. I surprised myself with how long I could hang on and there are two 2020 girls Emma Grant and Jasmine During who Emma Grant took off with I think 20 miles to go and then Jasmine maybe 15 miles or something like that maybe 25 and 15 or something like that and they were both Nobody could respond to them. Everyone was tired and couldn't go faster. But other than that, it just kind of after the first long, the first climb was the longest, but it wasn't super steep. And after that, there was maybe a selection of like 20. And then after this, the next hill, there was maybe 15 after. And so for the final hill, there was a group of, I think, six of us. And then there were two riders. Road. And so I was very happy that I was still there. And just when the last 2020 rider went, there's been he stayed on her wheel and yeah, finished fourth, which I was super excited about. Yeah, and that brought you up in the GC too and it gave you kind of something to aim for for the next couple days, right? Yeah, exactly. Yeah, I was fourth in the GC after that day also. So stage three was basically there was a descent and then a loop and then an ascent. So it was pretty like It was pretty mellow for the first 40 miles. Well, actually, it was not as mellow as I thought it was going to be, actually. It was pretty, there were definitely some attacks and stuff, but what really lit it up was this gravel section at mile 40, and it was a gravel section two miles long, and it was real gravel. It was like soft and but really big rocks too so it was hard. Clara Hansinger attacked at that point and she's under 23 national champion for cyclocross so that obviously was where she should have attacked but unfortunately there was a crash pretty near the front of the race and I was caught behind it a few a few people were caught actually quite a few people were caught behind it. Um, and, um, but me and, um, Jess, Sarah from Huggins were together. Um, Jen and Emma from 2020. Um, but Jasmine was in the front group of three people. So it was Clara, um, Jasmine and, um, Heidi friends from rally. so they had a teammate up there so they weren't going to do any um work to get up there which was obviously totally understandable um but it took a lot of effort to get back to those that group of threes and it was just me and Jess um and it was yeah I mean we had to do it because if we hadn't like they would have just stayed away for the rest of the race but it definitely took its toll and I kind of blew up on the last climb. when 2020 started attacking. So I think that they rode smart as a team. I don't think it was anything sneaky or anything like that, but it was very hard. And yeah, I guess my one regret was just not being... better positioned into the gravel. I wasn't terrible positioned, but I wasn't on the front. I wasn't the front three wheels or anything. Once I was caught behind that as somebody attacked, then I wasn't able to keep up with them and stuff. That day I slipped from 4th to 7th down in G.C., but I was really proud of How hard I worked and how hard I tried and also not slipping down even more, basically. And I think it's really impressive, kind of like you said before, that you went from, you know, the very first stage race you went to, you raced exactly one day. And then the second one, you get to continue on each day, but because you're pretty far off. Just inside the time cut on the first day, it's not the same as racing for this GC position. And now you show up to Cascade and you manage several stages with gravel. You don't flatten all of them. And now you actually find yourself up at the front actually in control as much as one can be in control of a stage race by themselves. You know, in control of your own destiny, certainly. Yeah, it felt good to, like, actually try, like, to see what I could do, for sure. And, yeah, I was telling Cole earlier, actually, that I got a huge gash in my tire in that gravel section, but because I had tubeless, I didn't flat. So I'm very, very grateful for that. The gods, yeah, wanted me to flat. But a few of my teammates flatted, and I think a lot of other people did in that couple of seconds, actually. So, yeah, I was really lucky. Now, had you flatted, would the team car have been close enough? Do you think you could have gotten wheels actually having, you know, some support, unlike other times when you just show up and you just have to hope for a neutral support car or something? Yeah. So, yes, but the problem... I mean, looking back, I'm really glad that I didn't get a flat because two of my teammates got flat in that gravel section. So like, they would have had to, they would have already been with them. So yeah, that would have just been chaotic. But yeah, so theoretically, yes, but it would have made their lives a lot harder for sure. So yeah, so that was stage three. Also the stage two and three together were really hard because stage two was like an hour and a half outside of town and stage three started at 8.30 in the morning. So it was like not very much time between finishing, like getting home and then getting up to, but yeah. and then so stage four was the crit and it was kind of at this park and neighborhood in Bend and it was really cool because there were tons of people out there was a band and like a peer attend and everyone like it was like the whole course people were there was spectators it was really awesome and the course was Fun. There was a hill in there, so there's also a descent, and there were, I think, like seven, eight corners, something like that. It was pretty technical, but fun and nothing unsafe or anything. There was one lip in the kind of inside of this corner that was after a descent. or when you were going really fast and into the uphill and that had caused a bunch of crashes in the I think men's two field that had gone before us so we were all we all knew about that that didn't didn't stop somebody from crashing in that but the first lap but which I was caught behind but was just The crit was hard. It was really hard with the hill and everything and there being so many corners. But I attacked and got in a break for a few laps, which was exciting because I love breakaways. So that was fun, even though it didn't last. And then Maddie got third again in that race. So that was very exciting to see her on the podium again. And again, that wasn't like a planned, like, you know, you attack at this lap or anything like that. But it was kind of like if you see an opportunity and stuff like that. And we were kind of going off each other with attacks and stuff. So that was fun to, again, feel like a part of a team. and yeah that's cool I was a little disappointed they didn't have the pros do the time trial as well but that would have been a lot yeah yeah I was so I wasn't disappointed because of that because I don't have a TT bike so this is like I feel like I kept looking for the races where there isn't a TT because I don't have a TT bike but I guess If I had made it like Merck style rules or something like that, that would have been. I mean, that would have been a lot, but it would have been cool. I think sometimes Amy D does have some TT bikes, though. I don't know if that's 100% true. Yeah, I think they might just have like aero bars, but... Oh, okay. Maybe that's it. Yeah. And then the circuit race on the last day was brutal. Oh my goodness. It was this five mile circuit where there were 23 turns. and it was basically super steep hill up and then super fast downhill with like some pretty sharp corners. So it was technical and hilly. It was really hot. It was at like 130 and it was 85 degrees or something. and everyone was tired from four days of racing. So it was basically just like, give everything that you can every single time up that hill. Um, but it was, um, it was awesome. I finished in the first, um, pace group. Um, so again, I, uh, maintained my GC position through the crit and the circuit race, um, to finish seventh. overall. And I think I was also proud that I finished in the top 15 for every race. So I could do, you know, stay, stay up there in the races that I might, it might not be as suited to me, but was able to hang in there. Well, was it, was it a different experience in a stage race, like, you know, racing not only for the day, but also for GC? Kind of. It was definitely a learning experience because I think I was more tired on day three than I would have been if it had just been, you know, like without the first two days. But I also like didn't know going in how I would do over five days and stuff. perform on the fifth day, you know, so that gives me confidence for the future and stuff like that. It is, I didn't want, like, I wanted to still race every single day, not just kind of look at the GC only, but I also, like, the last day, for example, The girl who was in eighth place going into the day was up in the front group and I had like a minute and a half on her at the beginning, but they are maybe a minute, 20 seconds or something like that, but they were like 50 seconds ahead of us. So I was getting a little bit nervous. And so I talked to Maddie and she really helped bring. like limit the loss of time, which was awesome. And that's just something that I like hadn't really thought about, but like wouldn't have thought about before if I hadn't have been thinking about like maintaining my GC position. Yeah. Well, well, I'll, we'll cut this out, but I'll, I'll just tell you right now that I knew you could handle five days of racing hard. Oh, see, now you just ruined my next question. I'm sorry. Well, I told you I'm going to cut it out. Sorry. So what's your next question? Oh, I was going to say, so Coley, as Emma's coach, is there anything you did sort of special sort of between the conclusion of Collegiate Road Nats knowing that Cascade was coming? Or was it just, you know, you knew she could handle it and you were just going to keep chugging along? So there was really nothing special. It was more like just, making sure that she would be in the right physical and mental state to be able to focus on a race for five days straight without the residual fatigue that comes from peaking for nationals. Emma, well, do you have any more thoughts on Cascade? And also perhaps on Collegiate Nats and then Cascade shortly thereafter. Yeah. Well, so after, I think after winning the crit in 2018, collegiate nuts, like the, I mean, winning the team time trial with my team was incredible and that was definitely the highlight. But for the road racer crit, it was always going to be a little bit disappointing if I hadn't won because I had won before. I was still happy to get third in the road race but having Cascade was definitely something that was something to look forward to I just wanted it to be kind of like a quote unquote clean race like as in no mechanicals and so I was just so happy that it worked out that I didn't get any flats or mechanicals and I was also just like really Happy with my performance and stuff. So definitely gives me motivation for the future. Yeah, I was really happy and really proud of your performance too. You know, even though we don't have power data. I know, I can imagine how angry you are. I'm actually not angry. I'm just like... Oh, that would have been nice, but it happens. I've had my fair share of disappointments in racing and coaching, so it's just another thing that happens. I looked for somebody with 170s to give you, or a spare power meter like pedals or something, and I couldn't find anything for you. Well, Giant should be replacing it soon. Hopefully not with another gremlin Yeah, I know, I know, I just really didn't like water Well, in that case, Emma, thank you for coming on to our podcast Yeah, thank you so much for inviting me, it was fun Yeah, I think it's nice for people out there to also listen to see kind of like what it's like from the, a little bit from the, you know More common, I guess, athlete perspective of going to these races versus, you know, you can listen to interviews from big time pros about stage races and stuff, but it's not quite the same. Alright, that's our podcast. Thank you everyone for listening again and sorry about that little bit of audio interference right at the end. So as always, please subscribe. Please give us a nice rating on iTunes. Thank you, Emma, a lot for coming on to the podcast and talking about Cascade. Good luck at Colorado Classic. And as always, for any questions, comments, coaching or consultation inquiries, please send an email to empiricalcycling at gmail.com. If you'd like to make a donation to the podcast, please visit empiricalcycling.com slash donate. And with that, happy riding. 