Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Kolie Moore, joined as always by my co-host, Kyle Helson. And thank you, everybody, for listening. So please subscribe to the podcast, obviously, if you haven't. And a five-star iTunes rating and a nice review goes a long way. Thanks so much for that. Also, you can feel free to share the podcast on internet forums or with your friends. That is really one of the best things you can do for the podcast if you want to support us. Also remember that we are ad-free, so if you want to support us in terms of getting us a burrito, I'm just kidding, it's actually going towards getting a recording platform and hosting and microphones and things like that. So if you want to do that, send a donation to empiricalcycling.com slash donate. We've got the show notes up on the website and we're going to put all the questions that were answered up there. I may or may not timestamp them. I don't know how much time I've got to do that, but we'll do our best. If you have any coaching consultation inquiries, you can shoot an email to empiricalcycling at gmail.com as usual. And of course, if you have any questions or comments, you can let me know, reach out on Instagram and the DMs too. That is empiricalcycling. on Instagram, obviously. We've also got some merch up at Threadless. What is it? Empiricalcyclingpodcast.threadless.com. If you want to get one of those awesome metal logo stickers that look like tree branches, those are awesome. Feel free to go grab one of those. And also, so this episode is actually from, my last plug is usually the Instagram AMAs, but that's where this entire podcast comes from. So on the weekends, I answer questions in the Instagram stories I usually give short answers and a lot of people have said thanks this is one of the best things on Instagram and I really appreciate that I hope it's true for everybody I can't imagine it is but yeah thanks everybody for participating in that it's a lot of fun for me even though I frequently have to be reminded that it is in fact the weekend when it comes around so and also if you're Reading those questions a lot of the time, the questions that look like they're taking the piss, they do indeed come from Kyle. Hey, hey, hey, giving away the secrets. These are trade secrets. But half of them actually do not come from Kyle. And if you are taking the piss, make sure it's a good one. All right, so let's jump into these. So we've kind of grouped them by, you know, training intensity. type questions, periodization, some questions on adaptation. We have some very general questions on like lifting angles and sex and VO2 max and resting and all that kind of stuff. So we'll get into that in a little bit. So why don't we jump right into the first one? So this was right from the first Q&A of 2021. And by the way, these are what I thought were the best ones, especially if something was asked several times. I was like, all right, we definitely got to include this. What is the best way to gauge RPE? And other than it depends, you know, so how would we do this? Kyle, thoughts on, why don't we talk about RPE for lifting for a second? And then we'll talk about it with endurance training. Yeah. So for lifting, what's nice about it is that there's a fairly straightforward conversion where a 10 out of 10 is You absolutely reach like concentric failure where you can't contract your muscles hard enough anymore to actually complete a rep. That's easy and at least easily defined. And then usually for RPE, whatever the difference is between that number, like seven out of 10, that's about how many reps away you are from. failure from that like concentric can't actually contract hard enough failure. So seven out of 10. That's a typical way to do it. Yeah. But I would say that has an asterisk because that only really works if we're lifting heavy. Like if we're lifting and heavy in terms of like sets of like three to like six. Yeah. And if we're lifting lighter loads, then I don't think that actually works that well. Certainly. For me, I think it probably works okay through 10, 12, maybe 15 reps. But yeah, if you're going over 15 or something like that, yeah, then it's no longer a good metric. Yeah. So here's actually how I usually gauge an 8 out of 10 because that's where the intensity I'm usually going for and I'll occasionally reach out for a 9, especially later in a training period. An eight to me is like, this is really hard, but I'm absolutely certain I can do it flawlessly, in terms of technique especially. A nine is like, I have to focus on the technique. I am worried about making sure my knees are tracking straight for squats or something like that, or locking my back and shoulders for deadlifts. or like bracing my core for like single leg squats or press. That to me is like getting into a nine. If I hit a 10, like if I hit failure, I'm like, oh, that's an 11. Like a 10, you should actually be able to accomplish a 10, but like only just. And you're like, man, if I go one more rep, I am absolutely certain that I'm going to fail this rep. That's... That is absolutely a 10. So like, you know, if you're lifting sets of like 10 to 15, like a four reps in reserve to like a six, it's actually pretty hard. Like I would call that more like a seven than like a six. You know what I mean? Yeah, yeah, yeah. And I think it depends too how much you have been doing that one. like modality. Say if you just switched over from doing more higher reps to doing lower reps, then you may have to slightly recalibrate like that RPE as you get used to like, oh yeah, I can actually either push heavier weights or push bigger sets. So there's that asterisk as well. But yes, that makes sense. If you imagine that, yeah, you don't actually want people failing, like failing, failing reps, because that's like... It just adds the amount of risk involved, especially if people don't fail well or don't know great ways to drop a barbell. Deadlifts are probably the easiest way where you can fail. You just let it go. Like a squat or something, you can potentially hurt yourself, especially if you don't use safeties or something like that, or you don't know how to drop the bar off your back and jump forward far enough that you don't get like... Tripped, like you've seen those gym fail videos, or someone drops a barbell and the barbell rolls forward and just sweeps their legs out from underneath of them. Yeah, well yeah, 95 out of 100 of those squat failures are people like falling forward and like getting their head taken off. Yeah, so yes, I think steering people away from failure for that reason is good. Yeah, and also I think for like lighter reps, lighter stuff like maintenance type lifts, like you just need to get some, just a little bit of stress onto the joints. Not too bad. I would say that like, you know, like a four to a five out of 10 RPE, you do not want to be five reps away from failure. You know what I mean? Because to me, that's like getting closer to like a six or a seven. So like a five should be like, this is totally easy, but I feel like there's some load here. Right. Just enough to challenge your balance, but not too much. So yeah, so all right. So now let's talk about... Endurance RPE. So this is kind of a tough one because we actually have to accept like anchor points kind of like with power intensity. You know what I mean? Right. So like, yeah. And for new athletes too, I think it gets even harder because say you're more experienced and maybe you have a power meter. If you didn't have maybe a good gauge of RPE before, kind of looking at power numbers while you do workouts and while you do things that are prescribed in power zones can help you calibrate that RPE gauge, whereas if you're a brand new athlete, maybe just with a heart rate strap or something, you're like, I don't know, is this hard? I mean, this feels hard, but like, what's hard, you know? Yeah, and I would say, yeah, so like there's two really big anchor points for me. in terms of intensity and how I describe them. So for FTP, obviously, this is a big one. So the FTP intensity needs to be hard, but it should not be so hard that it requires a ton of focus and concentration and increasing effort as you go. So I was actually doing some threshold work recently. and I noticed very distinctly over FTP. I was like, yep, there it is. I was like, after like two or three minutes, I was noticing that I had to focus mentally a lot harder in order to keep the same power output. And I was like, this is definitely over threshold. I backed it off and it required a lot less effort. And it was very distinct decoupling there. So does that make sense? Yes, I think it makes sense. And I think that's also a good, Reference maybe for people who have done, say, VO2 intervals after you just spent a bunch of time doing sweet spot or threshold where you're like, oh man, this first dive back into intensity, you have to focus a lot more when you're trying to do 4x4 or something like that at VO2 as opposed to, oh, 2x20. Yeah, like you said, it should feel hard, but it shouldn't be excruciating, and it shouldn't require you to psych yourself up, ready to go. Yeah, and so, yeah, so to me, this is like a seven. I say seven is an FTP, because otherwise we could say eight is FTP, or like nine is FTP, who knows? You know, it's, you know, there's not a great way to really... put a direct correlation between like a power number or like percentage of VO2 max or percentage of FTP to RPE because it's going to be a little different for everybody. Like my threshold is like, what, like 50% of FTP or my like endurance threshold, like LT1 is like 50% of FTP, maybe a little more, but for somebody really well trained, it could be like 75% of FTP. Yeah, totally. And I think that's where it's... It's something that you not only have to calibrate once you're new and you're starting and you're figuring out how this whole RPE thing and what feels hard works, but as you get more experienced, you occasionally do have to go back and maybe not actively recalibrate, but that whole time that you're training and spending time on your bike, you're essentially slowly recalibrating anyway. Okay, so actually one more follow-up on this. Well, let's talk about LT1 in a second. But in order to find these thresholds, here's a question I have, which is, do you need to go over this threshold to find it? I would say the scientist in me says yes, but I can see why people would suggest that maybe you don't have to. Yeah. And also the scientist in me and also the practical athlete in me says yes. It is easier to push a little harder and go, oh, this is different, and then go back and go, yeah, this is better. And that's just, you know, that's just me because, you know, in testing, occasionally I get some decoupling in like my RPE and like power output and I'm like, I got to gut check myself. You know, if I'm like tired from something, okay, push a little harder. Okay, cool. Bring it back. Now I got it. So anyway, that's just me. So that goes straight into the second question of, can you describe the RPE you like to prescribe for endurance rides? And yes, indeed, I can do that. So actually, the talk test is pretty good. So can you actually speak- The gold standard or the old standard, yeah, of- Yeah, I don't tell people to pass the talk test. I don't write this in their workouts, but it works for sure. Um, cause I think, I think when the, when VT1 decouples from LT1, um, I think it goes down. So, uh, don't quote me on that. I've, it's been a little while since I've seen a paper on this, but like maybe over a year, but, uh, so I think, uh, I think that's what happens. So that could work for sure. That'll, and it's always better to err a little bit on the cautious side. Like you don't always want to be right on the edge of something. Um, so I would say. LT1 endurance performance, riding under this, you want to make sure that it's about the hardest you can ride while still feeling easy. You don't need to think about it. Yeah. It should be... Fun is the wrong word, but it should be where... Yeah, if you're... Going out with your friends on a Zone 2 ride or something like that. Yeah, you can have fun and chat and catch up and not be like, someone is driving us really hard. Yeah. Okay, so next question. Over-unders crush me. Sweet spot is easy. Normal? What do you think, Kyle? Okay, well, some of the... does hinge a little bit on how much over and how much under. And the other thing that would... So without knowing how much over is over that this person is doing, it may point to the knee-jerk reaction of is your FTP set correctly? In the sense that if sweet spot is easy, whatever easy means, it could be that sweet spot hits that... as previously described 7 out of 10 on RPE and then because that is only say low 90s percent of what the athlete has their FTP set at that the overs might be more over than they realize. And the unders are actually sweet spot. Yeah, well, and here's another thing that I've noticed with over-unders, because I don't prescribe over-unders like this, but I've seen it a lot, where it's done symmetrically. Like, for instance, it's like, for every two minutes under, you do two minutes over, or something like that. Like, you know, it's a very satisfying, like, five minutes on, five minutes off. Okay, cool. Symmetrical. I do not think about over-unders like that. I think about, you know, about what is normal for, here's my question, is what is normal for time over threshold total? And, you know, if you look at like a hard, you know, one to two hour race, typically it's not more than about 25 minutes. And so the question is... Right, you're having a bad day if it is, right? A lot of times it means that you are either dying and like getting dropped and chasing back, or it means that every slight undulation is just like you're not somehow you're not in the group or something or you're just slammed. Yeah. You know, also there's a lot of it depends in there. So I typically think about like, OK, if I want this person to do about 20 to 30 minutes over the threshold total. And, you know, if you're doing steady state, you could probably do easily like six by five if you're not doing it absolute max or even if you are. OK, you know. This is doable. So when we're doing over-unders, we don't actually have an off period really to recover with. And so I usually start with like 30 seconds over to like four and a half minutes under. And depending on how well trained the person is or just what I think is reasonable for their, you know, either mental state or their ability to recover or yada yada, there's a lot of factors going to it. I'll do like, you know, 30 seconds over, four and a half. And by over, I mean like, you can actually adjust this. Like maybe start with like 30 watts over FTP, something like that. You know, maybe 20 if you don't have much anaerobic capacity. And then go down to like tempo watts. And you'll feel like you're recovering pretty, hopefully you'll feel like you're recovering a little quickly, but it's hard for a minute or two. And then you go, okay, now I can do this. Then you go over again, and now it's hard again. And then it's hard when you go back under, and then it gets easy. So you want to make sure that you're not killing yourself with this kind of stuff is really the big takeaway. Because there's no wrong way to do over-unders unless they're absolutely unaccomplishable. Right. And I think that's a good point that with the over-unders, it shouldn't feel like you're hanging on by the skin of your teeth on the under portion necessarily. Like it should not be... Yeah, you can imagine a terrible situation where it's like, oh, my overs are, I don't know, 50 watts or something over FTP, and then my unders are at 100% of FTP. That's not really under. Like, where do you recover? Yeah, like, you don't. You keep going, and then it feels like you just did, you know, a 20-minute max test or something, and you're just completely blown. Yeah, and for like thresholds, so like over slash at, I guess. I would say you want to keep the overs to like maybe 15 or 20 seconds. And you don't want to send it that hard. You don't want to do like stand up and do like a race finishing sprint and then go back to threshold. Like you want to keep a little bit in the tank. You want to make sure that it's accomplishable. And so you, so especially for like, you know, short accelerations, like five, 10, 15, 20 seconds over, over whatever intensity you're at for the unders. or the ats, I guess, if we want to confuse it a little more. Adjust that intensity so you're not dying the whole time. Make sure that it's reasonable because it'll get harder as you go. You want to make sure that you start a little conservative and then sneak up on the right maintainable value, I would guess. I'm noticing a theme with your suggesting starting conservative for several of these things. Yes, it's hard to go wrong like that. Okay, so the next question is, when they say two to three high-intensity workouts per week, does sweet spot count towards that? Okay, so who's they? We should probably establish first. I guess I would be one of the they. So Kyle, what do you think? Does sweet spot count towards that? I would say yes, if your not-intense workouts are, say, Zone 2 rides, like maybe your build period or you're just wrapping up build or base or something like that and you've been doing more Zone 2 rides and then sprinkling in higher intensity, then yes, I would say Speed Spot does count because that's going to be just a lot more of an intense workout and require a little bit more I would say probably careful planning around recovery if you're trying to sprinkle in these quote-unquote high-intensity workouts in and you're doing other volumes well. Yeah, and effective sweet spot working out workouts are increasing time and zone as you do the workouts. So if you start with 2x20, at some point you want to do, well, hopefully in the next workout you can do more than 2x20, maybe 2x20, 2.5, 2x20. 25 or something like that, maybe 4x15, who knows. So that's going to be taxing in and of itself, and you want to make sure that you can recover from that. So yes, unless you're doing it like a maintenance workout, in which case if it's like 2x15 sweet spot or 4x8 or whatever it is, just enough to kind of wear that rut in a little bit, but without taxing yourself too much, I would say maybe no. And if you want to do two other high-intensity workouts on top of that, if you can easily do that and recover from that, then yeah, that works. So it really depends on how hard you're doing the sweet spot. Yeah. All right. Thoughts on heart rate decoupling and whether you should or shouldn't push past it in zone two. So, okay. I have a lot of thoughts on heart rate decoupling because I have seen thousands of endurance rides by now. and I typically see heart rate decoupling on almost all of them. We'll occasionally get some negative decoupling, we'll occasionally get some no decoupling or whatever. So decoupling itself and the stuff that goes into what affects heart rate is... There's a lot of stuff. So it could be like heat. It could be fatigue. It could be adrenaline. Like maybe you got chased by a dog at some point. So there's a lot of stuff where your heart rate might decouple from your power. Maybe you're not eating enough. Maybe you're not drinking enough. Maybe it's like, you know, 30, 40 Celsius out. These are reasons why your heart rate might decouple and everything else is fine. So the heart's got some work to do at a lot of points. and big question is why is this happening? So usually I see no heart rate decoupling for only the slowest of the slow twitch endurance athletes who ride a lot. Other than that, I usually see some heart rate decoupling and does it, you know, do I, does that bother me? Does that, do I, should I, do I think somebody should avoid it? I would say If your RPE is matching up with endurance rides, like your endurance RPE is there, and it's maintaining, great, I don't care about heart rate decoupling. So, does that make sense? Yeah, and I think that's one of those things too, like you said, for the vast majority of people, if it's unavoidable, if you maintain effort or perceived intensity, then... There are a myriad of reasons why it happens. And so that doesn't mean it's bad or good. It just is. Yeah. Yeah. And there's nothing special. Like, Andy Kagan has said this a lot, and I was glad that he said it because I agree with it, that there's no special point in heart rate decoupling to, like, move on. Nothing means that, like, you're too fit or not fit enough. Like, if I wanted to right now, like, I've barely done any riding in the last, like, three months. And if I wanted to right now, I could jump on the bike and just start doing threshold workouts if I wanted to. Just because my heart rate would decouple like 20% on a two-hour endurance ride, that doesn't mean that I'm not ready to go do threshold stuff. Right, that's a good point, yeah. Yeah, there's nothing special. I just have to make sure that I would recover from it. Next question, is it still realistic to believe that FTP is within a certain percentage of VO2 max watts? Yeah, well, as we've talked about before, defining VO2 max watts gets a little difficult if you are going to, say, hook yourself up to a gas exchange cart and try to paddle at VO2 max or figure out ways that elucid you working at VO2 max. and also for different athletes what say you're using the I don't know the the VO2 max estimator from your Garmin or something like that that may also not be a great estimator I would say yeah don't rely on the Garmin because the Garmin is a little finicky typically in reality VO2 max does not actually doesn't move that quickly in terms of going up and down day to day or even week to week. It'll usually move up and down slowly, but if you're trying to model it with a Garmin algorithm or something, I would say it's probably not as reliable as you want it to be. But yeah, so we've talked about this in the podcast before where a lot of watts can elicit VO2 max. And we'll get into, there's a good actually paper on intensity domains and stuff like that. So we'll talk about that in a little bit. But I think in terms of, you know, so let's talk about this in terms of O2 uptake. So, you know, if we look on a gas exchange cart, like somebody's VO2 max is like four liters a minute and somebody's... Threshold is at three liters a minute. Okay, cool. We've got a 75% here. Now the question is, there's no, well, it's not really a question, it's a fact, but like there's no one wattage that will get you VO2 max. And so when we now move this onto the power output, now it gets a little weird. And so you can estimate it like this. as long as you kind of bring it back to a gas exchange value, which WKO5 does. Does it do it amazingly? No. Does it do it better than Garmin? A little bit? Yeah, probably. Is it enough to rely on? Yes and no, because now the question is, like, if we have this data, what do we do with it? You know what I mean? Yeah. Do you always do your rides connected to a gas exchange cart? I would love to meet somebody who does. But yeah, I don't think that information is as actionable as you would want it to be unless you are doing this with a ramp test or something like that hooked up to a gas exchange thing. In which case, we're going to actually talk about this in the next Wattstock. You know, the lactate values that you get may not be as reliable as you hope. So there's a lot of if and yada yada. So anyway, so to beat this thing to death. Yeah, you can think about FTP being within a certain percentage of VO2 max watts. But, you know, in reality, it's got a lot of asterisks and is not as actionable as you might think. It's one of those things where if you want to model it like that, as long as you understand the tradeoffs and the problems in the models that you can use, like the Garmin or the WKO5 models. You know, you can use it as maybe like a year-to-year decision maker, but not like a week-to-week or day-to-day kind of thing. Yeah. I think that you brought up a good point in that, especially in papers and in academic research and publications, it may be useful for people to model it as such, but... There is definitely a disconnect between this appearing in some paper and being some metric that is used in a paper and then translating that into an actual useful tool for a coach or an athlete. Yeah. And honestly, I've had a hard time finding it actionable data because I want everybody to have a higher percentage of VO2max at FTP. than they have now. Like, that's it. And we're always kind of training towards that. It's not like, well, this is good enough. We don't need to get any more power out of this one. It's like, no, no, it's getting more. More power is better. So, yeah, I mean, I guess in that sense, yes, it's realistic to believe that your FTP is some percentage of VA2 max, and hopefully it's more than it was a month ago. Yeah, or a year ago, more likely. Yeah, a year ago. Does UIFTP change day to day depending on internal and external factors or during a big day? So I think this is a really interesting question because I think I've kind of mentioned this once or twice to either people in consultations or in the Instagram Q&A occasionally. But, you know, with fatigue. You know what I see is I see FTP being affected in two ways. For most people, FTP does not change day to day or with internal or external factors. But what will change is the TTE, how long you can hold it. So like if you're exhausted, you can probably hold FTP for like 30 minutes when you could normally do it for like 50. And when you're recovered and you're feeling good, all right, cool, it'll go out to 50. That's how I usually see FTP affected. But occasionally for some people, Um, we'll actually see the TTE stay about the same and effectively the FTP drop. And I think this, um, I've got some theories on why this happens. Um, but I don't have as reliable data as I would like to have for this kind of thing. So it's just an, in my experience type thing, uh, coaching some people. Um, but it may in fact, uh, be actually dropping due to like a VO2 max drop or something like that from whatever factors in the body. So there's not a great answer for this. so sorry yeah it would it would be unfortunate you imagine if changes day-to-day were significant it would be very difficult to actually gauge the intensities of workouts correctly right like if you had if it was going to change day-to-day by greater than the amount of power meter error you get, then it might actually be very difficult to reliably prescribe workouts. You can imagine you do give yourself a little bit of breathing room there by assigning workouts in zones rather than exactly at a specific wattage. But for people who do prescribe workouts at a reasonably narrow wattage range, If your FTP changed by a lot day to day, then if you wrote this workout a week ago and then for whatever reason your FTP is now 20 watts lower today than it was when that workout was created, well this could be a completely different workout all of a sudden. It could have gone from something completable to something that's no longer completable and you would almost have to be I don't know, like testing all the time. It's really hard to imagine what you would do in response if this was true. Yeah, and you know, if this does sound like you're going, oh, that's me. You are training too hard. Please take some rest. If you feel like you cannot do, like basically if there's a big decoupling in RPE with your usual numbers or the numbers that you can probably half or more of the time maintain, expecting that if you are training too hard that you wouldn't be able to do this half the time or more. you know then it's really time to like pull back because I do this with my athletes all the time like if they do if I've got an FTP workout for them and like you know a week week and a half two weeks ago you know they were smashing out you know they could probably do a lot more time and zone than I had prescribed at FTP and then like you know week two weeks later they're like you know kind of flagging with it it's not like their FTP went down we need to like pull the intensity down like 10 20 30 watts They need rest until everything starts to come back in line. So that's one of the ways that I look at this. And also, you know, I'm sure somebody's going, what about indoor workouts and outdoor workouts? Zero percent of the people that I coach have a different FTP indoors and outdoors. Maybe it's because I tell them to, you know, look at cooling indoors or because we're always using the same testing protocol. I don't know what it is. That is not something that exists on my personal roster, unless somebody's about to DM me like, no, what about me? Anyway, so yeah, I would say that that's not really a thing. Some people say it is a thing for sure. There's a lot of reasons why that might be or might be apparent. But yeah, physiologically speaking, I would say that typically your threshold is actually extremely stable. Oh, fuck me. I just tried to swipe at a gnat and I knocked my headphones off. Anyway. Good, good. Other edits. More edits. Anyway. All right. So what percentage of FTP for an effective endurance ride? Does it have to be 75%? No. I mean, especially because this question doesn't have a time frame given. Can you imagine holding 75% of FTP for, I don't know, six hours? Some people can, and they're, you know, racing Milan San Remo. But for mere mortals, it would hugely depend on the time frame and where you are in your season, your life, et cetera. Yeah. So, you know, at some point in the next probably month or two, I'm going to do an interview. with Coach Katie at Empirical Cycling. And when she was training with her previous coach, her endurance rides had been assigned at 70% of FTP. They were crushing her. Because when I told her how to find her endurance pace and ride at or below it, suddenly she could go for three, four, five, six hours pretty easily. And it was actually like 50, 55% of FTP for her at the time. And it's gone up since then because, you know, that's how you do these things. You train below that threshold at something, you know, sustainable and it goes up. You know, you don't like, you know, all that training at 70%, which was too high, didn't like, you know, quote unquote, pull up that threshold. That's not something that I typically think works unless it's like VO2 max work. So anyway, does that kind of make sense? Yes. I also would say, and again, we've said before that these levels are not prescriptive, they're descriptive, but even Coggin's very old chart does have 56 to 75% for that zone two, which is a very broad range. It is. Yeah. And I've trained people where it's even below that. Yeah, and these are given as ranges, and to be effective, it doesn't mean you have to slam them to that upper percentage all the time. Like, oh, it's only effective if I do it. Yeah, or thinking that being one watt below 56% means you're actually recovering when you ride. Right, yeah, yeah. That was four hours, but I was at a recovery pace. Where are you now? Anyway, when I say something like that, I usually get about five to ten people who message me and say, why don't you just at me next time? Well, I can't because there's a lot of you. So you're not alone. All right. So let's move on to the questions on periodization. So thoughts on mixing VO2 max and threshold in the same block. Now, I'm on record many times as saying that I prefer. to do a focused VO2 max block. And that is true. But a lot of the time, it doesn't happen that way. So especially this year, it seems to happen a lot where, well, actually, people get COVID this year. Or the winter doldrums are really getting to people this year in particular. And if pandemic stuff keeps up, next year might be worse. Who knows? While I prefer to do it, I need to make sure that somebody can actually take that training load before we get there. So a lot of the time, you know, doing, you know, what, I don't know, like seven to 12 VO2 max workouts in a two to three week block. That's a lot of work. And you need to make sure that you can handle that work and also recover from it. And so we need to make sure that there's enough time on the other side for potentially two week long recovery period where you finally start getting your legs back under you. And like happened to one of my athletes, if you go back to altitude from sea level, sea level to max block, now you've added- RIP. Yeah. Adapting to altitude to your recovery. And it took him even longer than I thought it would, but only by a couple days. Now he's back and feeling great. And the numbers are matching that too. And so that kind of shows what goes into doing a focused VO2 max block. You need preparation and you need recovery. And you need to make sure that if you're going to do it, right before racing that you know it's going to affect your fitness so much. You've got time to recover and then hold on to that fitness, et cetera, et cetera. So there's a lot of ways to do it. But for most people right now who got the prep kind of screwed up or the timeline screwed up from what had initially been planned, we are indeed doing mixed VO2 max and threshold in the same block. One of the downsides to this is it gets harder to tell what's doing what. Like is your TTE going out? Is your FTP going up because of the VO2 max work? These are all questions that we have and it's harder to discern or to test exactly what the effect on fitness has been at the end of a four to eight week block of this kind of stuff. In terms of scientifically measuring your variables and having certain expectations of the adaptation on the other side, it makes it harder to discern. It's not impossible, but you have to be a little more thoughtful and deliberate with that kind of stuff. Does that make sense? Yeah. It's actually funny because when I first read this, I was thinking about it the other direction that say you're doing threshold. There's nothing wrong necessarily if you're doing a threshold block. and adding in some VO2 max if you're going to do VO2 max next like introducing some higher intensities to like a little bit prep you for it but yeah that's a complete come answering this question from a completely different direction than you did yeah yeah and um I agree with you too that can work as well I mean there's honestly it's um Like I said, this was like the – what do you call it? The bait clip, the teaser clip from when I was on the CTS podcast recently. So I said on that podcast, it's less about the day-to-day type stuff. It's less about the individual workouts. It's more about the gross – by gross, I mean large – stimulus and adaptation that comes out. So there's a lot of ways to schedule a week or even do a workout. That's not important. The body of work as a whole. Yeah, exactly. Yeah, it's almost like addition or multiplication. What's that property called? Is it commutative or something? Where it doesn't matter if it's four times two or two times four. Yeah, that's commutative. Okay, cool. Wow, I remembered something from fourth grade math. Not my strength on this podcast. Anyway, all right. Kyle, if you have historically poor anaerobic capacity, even with focused training, should you work on it all year? I'm going to say no, because that sounds really hard. But first of all, to answer the question fully, you would have to know, what does historically poor mean? Does that just mean that you're not the type of rider who can race? you know punchy hilly kind of road races or something like that and if that's the case is that are those the races that you want to do really well at and so that's why you want this really good anaerobic capacity or the other question is is it hurting your racing at all like you can have poor anaerobic capacity that's fine because you're I don't know a pure climber and so who cares like it's nice to make all of the properties on that little mean max power curve go up but In some sense, it's fine. Like I would caution against working on something that's traditionally so intense all year because that's how you get really sick of the shit. Especially because anaerobic capacity workouts are not fun. Like they're not fun at all. They're type two fun. Yeah, they're type two fun for like the... 8 to 12, 15 minutes that you're recovering after an effort. Well, I mean, that's for me, a track spanner, but for others, it's a little shorter, I'm sure. But I think there's also a subtext in this question that says, if you work on this all year, can you improve it that way? And the answer is no. So it's like, if you're kind of weak in the like 60, like 45 to 75 second range, compared to everything else. If you just hammer intervals in that range, is that going to make you better? No, it will not. It will to a certain degree. Like if you haven't done this training before and you start doing it, okay, cool, you're going to get better. But in the long term, just hammering these intervals does not make you stronger with them. Unless you're like a natural sprinter and doing sprinting brings up your P max and that'll help. But beyond that, no. And that's when you think about off-bike periodization stuff. Like if you really want to increase your anaerobic capacity, building muscle is a great way to do it. And so then you go, okay, now when do I do strength training? Cool. End my season, take a rest, get into the gym. That's how you would do it. Yeah. And I think also this is one of those things where kind of like we talked before was Is there the direct correlation that just improving this one metric is going to improve performance? Yes or no. And anaerobic capacity is great. Who doesn't love to just unload a sprint on random people at the town line or whatever? But if that's what you're training for, then great. But yeah, you might want to step back and seriously look at whether this whole thing, whether it makes sense as a whole for your racing or whatever your goal is. All right. So next question is when coming off a month break from training, what would you start with? Low intensity. Just chill. Yeah, definitely. Yeah. Yeah. Start increasing the volume. Yeah. Ride easy. Do what's accomplishable and chill. And then next week, try to do a little more. That's it. Yep. And if you're panicking- No reason to- Oh, yeah. Sorry. Go ahead. Oh yeah, no reason to think that you have to quote unquote make up for lost time or something like that. I think people get really paranoid that, oh, I took some time off and so now I have to redouble my efforts because I have to make up for that. You're like, well, no, that's not the point of taking time off. Yeah, yeah. I mean, and that's something I see when people are Like I said, if you're panicking that you've got stuff coming up, it's best to temper your expectations from that and rearrange your goals instead of crushing yourself because you haven't been doing that much. And so if you really just go for it, when you get back on the bike right away, you're going to dig yourself a hole and you're not going to climb out of it until after the event that you want to do well in. And so you really have to think about, do I, you know, Is it actually a reasonable goal for me to be in shape for this thing or should I rearrange my priorities? So, um, all right. Is there such thing as VO2 max maintenance, like one workout every other week type of thing? Um, yes and no. Cause a lot of general aerobic work will maintain VO2 max. Um, and there's a lot of People who say endurance riding, like low intensity endurance riding is necessary to, you know, I think a lot of the time I hear this talked about, it's because people think that peripheral adaptations are what drive VO2 max, which is only partially true in a very small percentage of it. But, you know, doing a lot of just easy endurance riding is actually really good to maintain VO2 max. So pretty much any endurance or aerobic focused riding will maintain VO2 max. You don't have to go hammer four by five minute all out at 110 RPM every two weeks to maintain VO2 max. If you're doing FTP work and you're working extensively, you're going to maintain VO2 max. It's going to be all right. You know what I mean? Yeah. And we've talked about this before that because Aerobic work exists on a continuum and generally stimulates all of the same systems. It's good because you don't have to worry about it when you go to do a VO2 max block that your FTP is going to drop and vice versa. Yeah. And the other thing that I see is actually when it comes to FTP maintenance, I actually think that especially during a race block, This is something where you actually do need to do some maintenance of middle intensity, like between LT1 and LT2, like sweet spot threshold type work. Not so much with VO2max because the volume and the intensity typically takes care of that, but you need to maintain that metabolic fitness really well. So I would say, you know, with the exception of like doing a focus VO2max block, you pretty much want to And for coming off of a break and getting your legs back under you, you want to do a little bit of maintenance of that metal intensity. It doesn't have to be much, like 2x20 sweet spot that should be accomplishable for most folks who are in shape. So something like that, maybe 2x15, whatever. It's not as important what you do as just kind of going over that every couple weeks. Depends on what the person needs. Does that make sense? Yes. All right. Cool. Next question. Do elite riders actually only stick to polarized approach or is there actually more variation? Kyle, what do you think? I think we've answered this before. I think, oh, we just did this. Sweet Spot versus Polarized is kayfabe. Yeah. So it's unlikely that you will find that all elite riders do anything the same. even in the environment where people are on teams and maybe there's a team coach so at team camp they do stuff like not every if you're going to team camp and you have some sprinters and some climbers are you going to make them do the exact same things probably not like there will be some rides that you do together of course right where everyone goes and does X Y and Z but Even just in that limited scope, I can't imagine forcing elite international pros that they all decided, oh yeah, this is the one set of, you know, miracle intervals that everyone's going to do. Miracle intervals. I mean, I have seen that kind of thing, but a lot of it is actually more built around volume and teamwork when they do that kind of stuff. And so if you have like a squad of like, you know, five or 10 people or something built around the same purpose, like I could see that. Yeah, sure. But yeah, for the most part, it also depends on when do you want to be in shape? When are you racing? Like if you're doing team camp and people need to be in shape for spring classics and it's like February, yeah, you want to start going harder. But if you don't have to be really in shape until like May or June, yeah, you can probably keep it a little more chill. So yeah, so anyway, you know, polarized is like we said, it's like a tool in a toolbox. There's actually a really good paper looking at training intensity distribution in a lot of different sports, including cycling. And also it looks at it in different phases of the season. And so that's going to be very interesting when we finally get to look at that. I'm sure a lot of people who are aware of the literature know that paper already. It's been cited many, many times because it was super well done. And so what you're going to find is that, like, you know, yes, indeed, with cross-country skiers, like, they do polarized, like, a lot of the time, most of the time. But with cyclists, it's polarized, it's pyramidal, it's whatever the fuck, it's just everything. And so that's the way I approach it, too, with my elite racers, and pretty much everybody. So, yeah. Next question. What kind of long-term planning goes into an elite training plan versus an amateur, like a multi-year view? Yes. But not only just for elites, but for amateurs as well. Especially if you're a high-performing amateur or you just have a goal of in two or three years, I want to hang with this group on this race. I want to make the lead group. That can be a two or three-year process. It doesn't have to be next year. Yeah, and I think that's a good point too. Maybe, especially for new people starting out, like goals can have a range of dates associated with them. It doesn't have to be just because you're new. I can only think about, all right, I got to get, you know, just the short-term stuff. Like obviously within there, there's the expectation that goals are realistic. Like if you're brand new to racing, your eight-year plan cannot necessarily be, I want to go to the Olympics. Yeah, I think a good mix of long-term multi-year goals and shorter-term goals is healthy. Yeah, for sure. And it'll evolve as you go, you know, because if your long-term goal is to be in the world tour, and it turns out that you don't have the natural ability to do it, no matter how much work you do, you know, if your genetic ceiling is like four watts per kilo at FTP, you're not going to be in the Tour de France. That's okay. You can still be like, all right, I want to go win like amateur CritNats or like Masters CritNats or whatever. That's a great goal too. And that can also take a multi-year approach, especially if some years it's at altitude, some years it's at sea level, some years it's climbing, some years it's flatter. That's the kind of thing that can take the same approach. And the same thing happens with pros. Because with pros, a lot of the time, it's like... You want the shortest – well, for most people, you want the shortest timeline between where they are now and their absolute genetic potential in terms of performance. But you also need to think about race experience and team dynamics and all sorts of things. And so it's a multidimensional approach. But physiologically, yeah, like it is a multi-year plan in terms of getting them to their best fitness. All right. Last question on periodization. Generalized version of many questions here. So I saw something that came up very frequently. And so here's my summary of it. How much aerobic training is needed for the track and shorter events like hill climbs? And I also got a lot of training binary questions like should I train anaerobic or aerobic for these type of events? Kyle, I know you've got some good thoughts on this. Why don't you take a stab? Well, if you mean track sprinting, then you need fairly minimal aerobic training. That doesn't mean necessarily no aerobic training, especially if you like it, if you like doing some coffee rides with your friends or whatever. But even if you're going to do endurance events on a track, the lower categories they are still pretty aerobic because they're all you know greater than a minute long and you're going to be racing multiple times in a day so yeah you're gonna need aerobic training like you don't you don't have a ton of choice like if you if you have a bunch of even shorter scratch points whatever missing out and they're all five to ten minutes long like that's very aerobic like that's not that's not a 45 second team sprint type thing. Yeah, for sure. And one of the things that you'll notice about high level performance on the track, even with shorter events, like 10, 20 minute events, like let's say you're only in the elimination race for 10 minutes or five, still highly aerobic. And you don't see many people who are like, a Cat 3 on the road who are racing the World Cup on the track. These people are highly aerobically inclined anyway. And the article I wrote forever ago, You're Training Too Hard for Criteriums, that applies here as well. You need, I mean, because I think a lot of people think, oh, it's a lot of sprinting, it's a lot of hard efforts. That's true. But when I tried to do these kinds of things on the track, I was not doing much aerobic training at the time, and I was doing a lot of anaerobic training, and I was like, oh, let's go have some fun. And I was getting shelled from a five-kilometer scratch race because I had no aerobic performance, and I was like, yep, that's what I thought would happen. I would say that even if you look at the women's individual pursuit, which is... A sub-330 is competing for a medal at the World Championships most times, and sub-4 means that you're pretty fast domestically in the U.S. That's super aerobic. Yeah, you need a very high VO2max for that kind of performance. Yeah, like who's very good at that? Like Chloe Diger, huge aerobic engine, even though it's a very short race compared to like a crit even. And even a few years back, Van Vluten won the silver medal in the individual pursuit at track worlds, having basically never done it really before. And she didn't do it because she didn't win because she like stopped doing aerobic training. She did it when she was also world time trial champion, you know? Yeah. Yeah. I mean, And we see the same thing with like Ghana, Filippo Gama, Ghana right now. You know, world TT champion, champion on the track, like just a aerobic monster and also an anaerobic monster. Like he's got like a 1600, 1700 watt P max, right? Like, I mean, also because he's massive. Yeah, isn't he like 190 pounds? Yeah, but... This is one of the things that like, actually, here's my favorite example of this is Brad Wiggins going from Tour de France winner to being on the team pursuit squad for Rio. He went from being a spindly little climber to being jacked because, and I've used this example many times, his VO2 max isn't going to go up. Like he's at his max. So where do you get more power? You have to work it anaerobically. For most amateurs, it's the opposite. Like you are far from your anaerobic or your aerobic potential. And you're also probably far from your anaerobic potential. So you could probably do both, but you absolutely have to do the aerobic stuff too. Yeah. And I would say, even if you look like at hill climbs, there aren't many hill climbs that are, well, so there's the very long hill climbs, which are super aerobic. Obviously it's like, oh, we're going to go climb Pike's Peak today for the national hill climb championship. Yeah. Yeah. Even if you could do short hill climbs like the Red Bull one in San Francisco or whatever, that's still multiple rounds in a day and it is still much longer than 35 seconds. Yeah, like if I were going to go compete in that, like, or you and I could probably do pretty well in round one. In round whatever, we're just all turning it left in the dust. All downhill. Yeah, like Chris Tolley and his like massive like 300 whatever, 400 watt FTP, like... and his, you know, eight, nine hundred watts for a minute. Like he can do that more than once. Like we can do that probably twice in a day and then we're going to be on our asses. Yeah. Like, no, thanks. I must be lying over here. Yeah. So, yes, unless you are doing pure track sprinting, aerobic is very good. Yeah. Likely will help all of your athletic endeavors. Yes. All right. So. Now I've got a couple questions I grouped together under the heading adaptation. Question one, do aerobic gains require protein? Kyle, do they require protein? Yes, but your body requires protein, generally speaking, to just exist. And the more that you are... exercising aerobically or anaerobically or pure strength or whatever, your body is going to be turning over tissues more often. And so you're going to need protein from something, hopefully food. Yeah. And especially if we think about adaptations like making new myosin heavy chains, like a long-term change of fiber type or angiogenesis, making new capillaries in your muscles. These kinds of things require protein and just adaptation in general. Like if you're making mitochondria, protein. If you're making enzymes for glycolysis, protein. If you're lifting weights and you need new muscle tissue, protein. If you are doing high intensity interval training, protein. Everything, all adaptation requires manufacturing of new proteins. That's it. That's, yes, absolutely. You need protein. And I think if you are, like, if you're getting less than, like, one gram of protein per kilogram body weight per day, and you're an aerobic endurance athlete, you will notice a huge difference in how you feel on the bike, and in general, if you bring that up to at least one and a half grams of protein per kilogram per day. Yeah. So, yeah. Don't think just because aerobic work is all carbs and fat that you don't need protein at all. And actually, oftentimes, this isn't always the case, but a lot of times, I think endurance athletes get away with not having to worry about protein goals because you can eat in such large volumes that you're going to naturally, as long as you're not eating just, I don't know. Oats and even oats have protein as long as you're not just like inhaling sucrose. Yeah. Like as long as you're not getting 4,000 calories of Sour Patch Kids a day, you're going to, and even those have some protein because they're gelatin, but you're not just like, like drinking Coca-Cola for your, for your excess calories. Like you're going to pretty easily get there. Like if you have a Chicken Bowl at Chipotle. It's got well over 50 grams of protein in it, like just sitting down and that's not like a completely outlandish meal, right? Yeah. Well, also let's take somebody like me though. Like if I were an endurance athlete right now, like my threshold is like a whopping 180 watts. If I do a threshold workout and I'm exhausted by the end of it, I have probably burned no more than like... 400 or 500 kilojoules. Like it's not a lot of food. So I have to be more deliberate about my protein intake, especially if I want to maintain my muscle mass that I've worked a long time to get, you know? So if you have like a 350 4-watt FTP and you are riding a lot, then yeah, it's much more likely you're going to be just by means of the quantity of food you're eating, especially if you're eating like normal whole actual food instead of like processed stuff. You're probably going to be getting a decent amount of protein, although it's worth looking at, even if you are one of these very large quantity food eaters. Yeah, and that doesn't mean you have to go completely crazy with it, and you don't have to go and give yourself disordered eating, but just for a week, just write down the things that you ate every day and just... to get a general sense. And don't try to special it up because you're writing down. Just do your normal stuff if you think you're short on protein or whatever and look at it afterward. And you don't have to necessarily write quantities. You can just kind of do eyeball and say, oh, well, oh, I had a lot of snacks that were, I don't know, Sour Patch Kids. Maybe I should swap those out for something else. Yeah, it's sort of like getting a power meter for the first time. It's like just gather data. It doesn't have to change everything you do right away. Just look at it. See what you've been doing. That's all. All right. Next question. Does anaerobic work kill off mitochondria? No. Well, not like directly. Yeah. Every time you do a squat, like a little knee will stab someone. Oh no, I'm dying. Just the screams of millions of mitochondria crying out at once, like the destruction of what was that planet in Star Wars? No, it doesn't work like that. It's basically what keeps mitochondria around is stimulus, aerobic stimulus. And if you do too much anaerobic work and you're not doing enough endurance, extensive work, yeah, you're not going to have as much mitochondria as you might otherwise. If you are training high-intensity intervals, every day or several times a week and you're not doing much low-intensity stuff, yeah, you're not going to have much mitochondria. A lot of people, and we'll talk about this maybe in the next episode of Wattstock, but when you do lactate testing on people who are, in theory, highly aerobically trained, like they have a high FTP or whatever, but they're not doing that much. like endurance riding or even extensive threshold type work. A lot of it's really high intensity. Lactate levels are higher than you might expect because they don't have as much mitochondrial density in order to consume the lactate. And that's one of the things where lactate and fatty acids have a similarity. Like you need a large amount of mitochondria to burn it because the way it goes away is aerobic, right? It goes into the Krebs cycle and then you create... reducing equivalence and it goes into the electron transport chain, blah, blah, blah. So that's something that I've noticed where people who train too hard don't have much of that. And so that has implications down the line. And so it's more like a... training intensity, training focus that can not even quote unquote kill off mitochondria. You just have to maintain a certain aerobic load in order to maintain the mitochondria that you have. So does that kind of make sense? Yes. Okay, good. On a similar vein, can you have a high VLA max and a high FTP? Sure. Yeah, sort of. So VLA Max. It maybe depends. Oh, yeah, go ahead. Maybe it depends exactly what they mean by high, which is unfortunate that you don't have a little bit more detail here. Right. So the big driver of VLA Max is your Pmax, because this is the maximal rate at which you will require energy. And especially if you have like a 1,500, 1,700, 2,000 watt Pmax. because there's no way you have enough phosphocreatine to cover like 10 seconds worth. Like your glycolysis gets switched on immediately. And so, yeah, so that's the big driver of VLA Max. And if you have a high FTP, like you can have, like I think I shouted out Andre Greipel in the last episode, you can have a 2000 watt sprint and a 400 watt FTP. Like these things are not mutually exclusive. They're driven by things that have a little bit of push and pull with like aerobic and anaerobic stuff, but they're not mutually exclusive, even though a lot of the time you might think like, oh, this power lifter can't go run a marathon and this marathon runner can't squat 800 pounds. Right. I think maybe people also think that they're mutually exclusive because it kind of feels like you either spend your time more focusing on Is it threshold and VO2 max training or you're spending more of your time focusing on anaerobic training and sprint training, which is certainly true, right? Like periodization, it feels like you, you know, and especially for a largely aerobic sport, you're probably going to spend, you're more used to spending your time focusing on threshold training. So maybe it feels like you're making a big sacrifice or concession to anaerobic training when you all of a sudden do a bunch of anaerobic training as if they're. Well, and also, if you're doing too much anaerobic training and you're not recovering well and then you're going and doing threshold work, you can go, oh, my God, my threshold's going down. So in the very acute term- Yeah, you're just tired. Yeah, you can have these kinds of effects. And I forget if I put one of these questions in, but it was a question on body weight and power. If I want to gain FTP, should I gain body weight? We're going to get into that in a Wattstock episode, but the answer is it's pretty similar. It's like these are not the same. This is not the same thing. It's not like, oh, I gain a ton of muscle, therefore my FTP goes up. I have probably 25 to 30 pounds of muscle more than I did like four years ago. My FTP has not gone up, believe me. If only. God. If only. Road to 100 kilos. Yeah, really. Okay, a follow-up question on this is my VLA max is 0.31. How important is VLA max for crits? Do I need to increase? So this is kind of what we talked about in the last Wattstock episode, but it's probably worth mentioning again here because I thought this was actually a good question. So if you didn't listen to the last episode, let's talk about it again. If you did, you could probably fast forward about a minute or two. So VLA max... is modified by aerobic training. It is brought down by an increasing FTP and an increasing aerobic stimulus. Because, of course, if you have more mitochondria from doing aerobic work, you can burn more lactate. And that's not something that you... It's not like, okay, my VLA max has gone down, therefore, I'm not going to be as good at crits. You're probably going to be better. Yeah. Because you could probably do the same sprint power and one-minute power, but you have more aerobic power. You're probably going to handle it better. And again, it goes back to the you're training too hard for criteriums thing because replenishment of phosphocreatine and like just your cell stasis in general is almost entirely aerobic. So you need to have that aerobic strength there. Yeah. Yep. And I think it's not as if it's not as if a crit is a single Anaerobic, like lactate generating event. It is not an aspirin. Yeah. So just this raw measure of maximal lactate flux is maybe not as useful as you would hope. Yeah. Yeah. And like if you have a high aerobic capacity and you've never done anaerobic training, if you do anaerobic training, maybe a little bit of weights or maybe just, you know, 30-30s or 15-15s for, you know, three to six minutes or something like that, your VLA max will go up and that will make you better at criteriums. So in those cases, yeah, sure. You can bring it up like that. But question is really now becomes individualized to the athlete. So what have you been doing? What works? What hasn't worked? What have you tried? And let's try to figure it out. So reach out to me for a consult if that's you. Anyway, so next question is, on FTP, push it up, pull it up, or both? And does the strategy change during the season? So I think I've mentioned this before. I don't really think about pulling up FTP in terms of like, Ride up just a little above FTP. That'll pull it up. Like that is what VO2 max work is for. Riding at like 105% of FTP, 110%, I don't think makes much sense in terms of FTP adaptation because you get about the same adaptation if you work a little below FTP and you do it for a lot longer. You know what I mean? Yeah. And I think you've said before. For a lot of the aerobic adaptations, to first order, number of contractions is the most important thing. So if you can do it for longer at a slightly lower intensity, that's going to be better. Yeah. Contractions equal presence of calcium. Presence of calcium equal downstream adaptations that increase PGC 1-alpha. PGC? PCG? PGC. I always screw that one up. PGC, yeah. I am slightly dyslexic. Sorry about that. Okay. And so, yeah. Yeah, anyway, it's just kind of one of those things that if you think about which has the greater number of total pedal strokes. Yeah, although this is something that people have asked me, people who are, you know, if you've thought about this, I think you are very insightful. So insightful people have asked me this, and if you've had this thought, you are among them. So the question is, if I increase the cadence, that increases my number of contractions. Does that increase the aerobic stimulus? And my answer is probably, it probably comes out in the wash. You know why? Because the contraction isn't nearly as long. That's my guess. Yeah, so integrated time is the same. Yeah, although then it actually increases the load on your sarcoplasmic reticulum and all the stuff that makes your muscle contract. And they have their own, you know, well, kind of, they have, you know, mitochondria around that. They have glycogen stores around that. And so it taxes that a little bit. And so if you need to pedal faster for any reason, like if you're not good at pedaling at 110 RPM at length for like a track race or something like that, like you have a hard time doing it for 20 minutes and you kind of have to in the race. Yeah. Okay. It's worth, it's worth training. Otherwise, yeah, I don't. In my experience, it's better to just let your body figure out what it wants to do and do that. And I've never seen anybody who was like, oh, actually, you know what? I have. Way back when Lance was a big thing. Oh, yeah. And he was doing 120 RPM, you know, spinning up climbs or whatever. A lot of people at that time tried to do the high cadence thing and it didn't work for them. And you would think, oh, it's going to add adaptation. It didn't. A lot of them went back to their low cadence ways. Yeah. Well, it worked for Lance because of additional O2 vectors. Yes. So those things aside. All right. So next question is, why training facet of carbs when training aerobic base is touted to bring on aerobic adaptations? So why, yeah. So why is low carb training a thing or why does it seem to be a thing? So I'm going to head off a question here. I don't do facet training rides. Just never, never do faster training rides. That's my opinion. It's supported by some facts. So don't do this. We kind of talked about this in the Fat Max Fallacies episode of Wattstock 2. But one of the things that does bring about adaptations seems to be low glycogen stores. So that's why... Doing low carb rides seems to have some beneficial impacts on some athletes. I've done this with a couple athletes. A lot of them loved it. Some of them hated it. So it's a strong spice and it's hard to do. And it's also a lot of the time, you know, what's the adaptation that we see out of it? A huge TTE is what we see. Can people get this by riding more? Yes. And so it's, you know, should you do this type of training? It's a strong spice. And if you are, I would say maybe, but for the most part, don't. Like do it under guidance of a professional, somebody like me, or, you know, to kind of help you not go over the edge. You know, lowering the carbohydrates slowly. But generally speaking, yeah, I used to say that this was a good thing for most people. But, you know, in practice, it's very difficult. Does that kind of make sense? I kind of rambled. Yeah. And I think that it makes sense, I think, because it became, I think it recently has become really popular because I think more pros started talking about how they were doing it. But you can imagine if you are a world tour road pro, you're already riding at the... maximal number of hours that you can probably realistically fit in a week. So you need some other way to make your aerobic base rides more difficult, at least occasionally. Yeah. Like, you know. Oh, sorry. Go ahead. Oh, no. And so this would be like one of those tweaks. And obviously, if you're, you know, a. World Tour Road Pro, you're probably also not doing every single aerobic base ride at like low glycogen stores. No, you're probably not. I mean, this is one of the reasons that I usually assign a low intensity long endurance ride the day after a super hard workout or super hard race because you've got low glycogen stores. It's good to go out and you got to keep eating for sure, but it's good to go out and just do more riding like that. You can get some extra adaptation that way, but you know, is it going to be like 20, 30% extra? Aerobic power? No, it's not. It's a small marginal improvement, but it's worth doing because it's super low-hanging fruit. Now, the hard part about doing any kind of low-carb training is keeping the diet isocaloric. This is actually the hardest part. And so this is what usually screws people up in the end, is maintaining enough calories to fuel that training. Because if you have a high aerobic power, like if you're training endurance rides at like 200, 250 watts, That's a ton of kilojoules. And it's hard to get in that much protein and fat and a smattering of carbohydrates. If you eat carbs on the ride, you're not going to screw this up. You've already got low glycogen stores. Don't bonk. But yeah, it's hard to do. And it's easy to do wrong. Anyway. Okay. Next question. How to train repeatability? all out until you can't go over a threshold or incomplete rest. Um, I mean, these are all good ways to do it. Um, you know, training your anaerobic capacity, also training repeated sprints in general, like 10 seconds on 50 seconds off, try to do that for like three by 10 minutes and then increase time and zone like that or time, time and quote unquote zone. This goes right back to the You're Training Too Hard for Criteriums article, which is replenishment of the cellular homeostasis is aerobic. And by doing repeated sprints, you are adding metabolic load. And what is FTP but the highest training load or the highest power output that you can maintain basically purely aerobically? Yeah. So there you go. That's the relationship. Does that make sense? Yes. All right. Cool. All right. So last section here, we have very general training questions. First one is, any favorite training experiment from a year with no racing? Kyle, what was yours? I don't know. I think this is probably... probably like some recency bias, but I feel like a big shift that I've had is that recently I've been doing like really, really focusing on more unilateral leg strength, which I think is done on wonders. I don't want to like oversell this, but and it's not so much as an experiment as like maybe a reconfirmation. But I think that's been a pleasant surprise, let's put it that way. Yeah, so your one rep max single leg squat has gone from like a year ago, like what's it gone up, like 30, 40 pounds, something like that? Yeah, something like that. Yeah, that, by the way, if anybody's wondering, is a ton of weight. That is a lot, like a lot of people are happy to put on 40 pounds on their squat in a year. Yeah. And this is also, you know, that's, it's give or take, it's like a 10% increase. So it's not like it's a 1% increase. You know, it's like, oh, like anything going up by 10% is quite noticeable. Yeah. And if that were aerobic, like, whew, man. All right. So my favorite as a coach was really getting to focus on training stimulus and response with athletes. And so it's not so much experimentation, although there was a tiny bit of that, especially with some low-carb stuff. But for the most part, it was just being able to train somebody without thinking, oh, we need to shift our priorities here because you have to be in shape to race. It was, let's get as much aerobic development as possible. And that's where I saw a lot of the... A lot of the stuff that I look for now in terms of VO2max increasing FTP or long endurance rides and low carb stuff increasing TTE and that kind of stuff. All that kind of things, all those kinds of things are what I was seeing in a year with no racing. And I was fascinated by it. And I also saw the practical limits of what people could do in terms of just training. without pulling back the training to get ready to race where you have to be kind of fresh and you're not pushing aerobically when you're getting ready for racing, although you can be for sure, but you're going to go from doing two or three aerobically focused workouts per week to doing one or two of those as like a race focused workout. So you're maybe not going to see the improvement in the aerobic metrics as you might think until you taper, hopefully. And so without that kind of stuff, and seeing people get stronger and then cry uncle be like, man, I'm tired. I got to take a break. You know, that kind of stuff. We just let it run its natural course. And then, you know, you pull it back, give somebody a rest and you start over. And it doesn't matter that it's like May. It doesn't matter if it's July or August. And some people just wanted to keep going. And I had to be like, hey, you have to rest right now. it's like it's September 15 weeks no rest all year like and we have seen these metrics stagnate but you want to keep pushing but now I gotta I gotta pull rank on you and be like you're not getting anywhere you need to pull back and let's and let's start this process over again so darn yeah anyway um next question does sex decrease performance on the day um And the answer is, as you might expect, it depends. So basically, it depends on the intensity of the session, the energy spent in the session, any particular muscle contractions, especially in the legs in the session. Like if you're holding somebody up. or something like that and a lot of strain on the quads isometrically, that can be quite fatiguing. Yeah, that seems hard. Yeah. If you've got some extra equipment or maybe psychologically it's very draining, yeah, there's a lot of things where it can certainly decrease performance. However, for the most part, it seems like no, not really. The average session, probably not. Kind of like in a regular workout. I would say also, You can imagine that in some circumstances, actually something that would decrease stress is actually good for performance. So yeah, well, I mean, I think this is stress relieving. Yeah. Well, remember the old like boxing thing of like, you have to refrain from drinking piss. Sorry. Well, that too. Man, there are some weird traditions in boxing, but like refraining from sex for a month before a fight. I mean, at that point, you could imagine anybody's going to be who's used to having a lot of sex is going to be pretty well frustrated, you know? Yeah. I don't know if that would increase. If I were walking into the ring, I'd be like, I'd be distracted more than anything, I think. Yeah, it just isn't. Anyway, yeah. So suffice it to say, it's probably fine. Yeah, it's probably fine. And if it makes you feel good, even better. Yeah, just don't do it in a hotel room with, you know, your teammates in there. All right, Kyle, cycling specific joint angles in lifts or full range of motion? I mean, both. So, in the sense that you already get tons of cycling specific joint ranges of motion when you cycle, it you the most of the goals of you going to the gym are more general strength and more general fitness so I think for the most people most part of people going to the gym worrying specifically about oh man like does this squat perfectly mirror my my pedal stroke range of motion is just way overthinking it especially if you consider motion aerobic Athletes who are going to do strength training are not going to be doing it for very long. And so you don't necessarily want to turn a two-hour gym session into a five-hour gym session because you're obsessing over setting up all the exercises exactly perfectly so that it exactly perfectly matches this or that range of motion. Yeah. Yeah, I mean, because it's a good idea, but it's also like not. Because the question is, what stimulus are you after? So if you're after increasing muscle strength or size or both when you go to the gym, doing this with as low injury risk as possible is the name of the game for me. And so if I can squat deeper with less load, there's more stretch on your muscles and so that increases the mechanical tension when you go deeper with less load. So you can basically get the same stimulus as doing like a quarter squat. with like three times the weight, which is going to be a ton of stress on your poor knees that are not used to having that much weight. Like I would definitely tear a muscle or a tendon or something like that if I were doing quarter squats with like 600 pounds. Yeah. And you're just adding unnecessary risk. Yeah, for sure. But when it comes to cycling specificity, yes, like strength is joint angle specific. What better way to do it than to be on the bike, perhaps? You know, this is where like doing standing starts or like big gear sprints or something like that can certainly help. And maybe occasionally doing some very specific joint angle stuff in the gym, like on the leg press, that can help too. But, you know, that's when it's like you get into the very last phase where you need to be cycling specific and you're not. just after the strength-based training, quote-unquote, of adding strength or adding muscle mass. Yeah. All right. And honestly, if you're thinking like, oh, I'm going to displace the general strength, like a squat or a leg press with a cycling range of motion specific, it's probably not worth it. And if you're only lifting once or twice a week, just stick to the basics. Make it easy on yourself. It's just, you know. Just don't overcomplicate it. Agreed. Okay, next question. Out of saddle increases heart rate and RPE. What to do? Train it more? So this is actually a really interesting question that I've thought about a lot because I remember the first time I thought about this was, well, I think, you know, another Lance thing back in the day because, you know, his training was, you know, very popular with cyclists at the time from like, you know, the late aughts, I think. to the early 12, 14 or something like that. He was like, oh, I've got to stay in the saddle because if I get out of the saddle, my heart rate goes up and my cadence goes down or something like that. Yeah, that's a thing that happens. I remember Contador saying the same thing too. He climbs out of the saddle. He's like, my heart rate's higher, but whatever. I'm going faster or I'm still climbing. And so the thing is, when you get out of the saddle, There's a lot of things that will come into play that will increase your heart rate and RPE. So if you are not well trained out of the saddle, like you don't do a lot of out of saddle climbing, the muscles that you're using are not aerobically well trained. So they're going to be very highly taxed. That's one, the first thing. So it's a technique thing and a training thing. Second is movement economy. Like if you're not efficient with the movement and you're like bleeding Watts out of every or your shoulders or your arms or hips or whatever, that will increase the O2 requirements for muscle contraction without it actually pushing you forward. So that's the second thing. Muscle efficiency. So you might be recruiting muscles that are less well-trained, and so they need more O2 to create the same amount of power, all right? So the other thing is, of course, Cadence. If you are lowering your cadence like a lot of people do when they stand up, me included, you are going to be recruiting larger motor units that are indeed less efficient. And so also, here's another thing. You are recruiting more muscles than when you're just sitting down, like you're using your shoulders more, you're using your back muscles and stuff. These muscles also require So they require more oxygen. And not only that, we've got one more thing. It requires more neural drive to turn on all of these muscles. So all of this together can increase heart rate and increase RPE. RPE can be highly coupled, in my experience anyway, to neural drive. So what would you say? Should somebody train this more or should somebody stay seated more? Because when you stand up, you can distribute the load a little bit and let your highly recruited muscles get a little rest. So I don't know. What do you think? I think it would depend on... Why exactly you think you need to stand? Like if it's a, if yeah, if you're going to be, I don't know, slogging up Vaughn 2 or something like that and you need to be able to move around a little bit, then yeah, like on your, if you anticipate using that as part of your strategy, then yes, training it. Like Contador used to do climbing out of the saddle because that's how he would not just climb seated the whole time and then decide on race day he's going to get out of the saddle and do it. But if you're just doing it because You need to mix it up a little bit in the middle of intervals, but it's not a big part of your climbing repertoire or something like that, then you probably don't need to train it. But the extreme example would be if you are going to do something like the Red Bull Bay Climb where you basically have to be out of the saddle for most of it, then yeah, you better be doing it. Yeah, but that's also a max effort. So if your heart rate and RPE are low for that, man, you're doing it wrong. You know, here's another thought, another practical like coaching thought is like, if you attack out of the saddle and you are, you know, that telegraphs what you're doing to people. If you can just do some regular climbing out of the saddle, you're going to stand up and they're going to go, oh, he's attacking. Oh, no, he's not. You're like, you can keep people off balance and like, you can stand up at some point and they'll look at you and go. Oh, he's just climbing. It's cool. And then you take off and they're like, oops. Yeah. Yeah. Like I remember once in a criterium, I, I was like, I'm going to try attacking in the saddle. Um, and I did and I got away, but it was like too good. Like nobody chased me. They were like, I was like up the side and they were like, Oh, I was like, I look back. I'm like, Oh, that works. Cool. Then I'm like alone. I'm like, Oh, I'm not going to break away. Oh, I'm dying. Yeah. Mistake. Yeah. So, um, yeah, I should have done that with like a lap to go. That would have been the move. Um, but it was like 20 laps to go. It was not, not a good move. Um, anyway, so those are some thoughts on that. So, um, all right, next question. Thoughts on recent research. Re, use of ketones to prevent symptoms of overtraining. Kyle, I know you know the answer to this. What is it? Sounds like you're just eating more. Yes, that is the answer. I mean, it's not the only solution to overtraining. Obviously, the first order thing for overtraining is do less, but sleeping more and eating more can help. I haven't read this paper or these papers, so please excuse me if I'm incorrect on this, but if they didn't control for total number of calories consumed, ketones contain calories. Not so different from just eating extra sugar and feeling better. Yeah, and also, like, if they did control for it, it's pretty easy to manipulate the stats for this kind of thing. Like, I've seen a couple papers on this where they did not control for calories, and I've seen papers where they have, and I have not been impressed by the stats in either. I'm not an expert statistician, but it's pretty easy to see, like, oh, yeah, this is eh. So, anyway, yeah, it's just eating more. More fuel. Especially if it's happening on the bike, it's just more food. Like ketones are the same as lactate. It's partially digested fats. So I think we did this in a Wastock episode where I don't think we probably explained the origin of ketones as much. So basically when you are breaking down fatty acids or you have a lot of, basically it's a lot of acetyl-CoA. The coenzyme A, that's the coa part, this is a small pool in a muscle cell, especially in a mitochondria. And so if you need to keep this available to keep the process of breaking stuff down, you are going to snip off the acetyl groups and stick them together. And that's where we get acetoacetate and beta-hydroxybutyrate, so ketones. So that's where it comes from. and it's just partially digested fats and whatever. It's even carbohydrates, but mostly with fats, it seems. Anyway, so yeah, it's just food. That's it. There's nothing special about it. Anyway. Maybe try something that tastes better because that sounds not awesome. Do you like drinking nail polish remover? If yes, try ketones. All right. Anyway. Alright, next question. Can you be at VO2 max if not at heart rate max? Yes. But also no. Like, if your heart rate max is like 200 BPM, just to make a nice round number, and you're at 170, you are probably not at VO2 max. But could you be at VO2 max at like 190? Yeah, possibly. So this is one of the things that happens with high cadence VO2 max intervals. is the higher cadence increases the diastolic filling. And so the heart actually gets more blood. So it has to pump less frequently to put out the same amount of blood or more specifically oxygenated blood. So we can think about it in terms of oxygen. And so yes, if you decrease the cadence, then you are going to increase the heart rate because it's not filling as much. And so it becomes a little more load on the heart. and well in terms of like the heart has to pump harder and more frequently to get the blood back to itself anyway so yeah so it's a little complicated but yeah you can definitely not be at your true heart rate max at VO2 max but the other question is like what is heart rate max anyway it's sort of like saying lactate threshold heart rate like it's not one certain BPM that is it like you can be well trained like your heart rate when you get off the couch is going to be higher than after you've been training for six months. You know? Yeah. And I think also you could imagine too, you just did a really hard, I don't know, one minute and 30 second all out effort and your heart rate is probably extremely high even after you've stopped. Yeah. For sure. Yeah. So, yeah. Yeah. So I thought it was a good question because actually I posted something on Instagram recently. because what I've noticed is the more somebody has day-to-day experience, and I've noticed this myself when I've wanted to comment on something on social media, it's like if I have more day-to-day experience with something, the more I'm like, oh, I have a good opinion here or I have an experiential opinion here. And so I put up something on Instagram that was like, okay, here's some view to max intervals. Here, somebody's cadence drops and the heart rate goes up and everybody's like, well, it's not my experience. It's like... Because usually you're not at VO2 max. At VO2 max is actually a special case of cadence versus heart rate. Because normally when you are lower in terms of power output, higher cadence will increase the heart rate. Like if you're a temporal threshold or even like just above threshold, like if you're not at true VO2 max and you increase the cadence, this is what happens. If you are a true VO2 max, if you bring the cadence up from like 80 to like 110, heart rate will usually drop. Next question. Why is resting so hard? Newton's Oz, a body in motion wants to stay in. Sorry. Probably because humans, one of the reasons is probably because humans like routine. And so now you're going to break up that routine, especially if you've been, oh, I've been really committed the last six, seven, however many weeks of training. And now I, oh, you're telling me to take a rest, but I want to keep doing this thing that I've been doing and that I really enjoy. Yeah. Well, I mean, you know, it's funny that you start with Newton's Laws because I call it rest inertia. Like you're resting, your body wants to keep resting. And that's partially, I think, what openers are for. I don't have any actual evidence of this other than I know that it can take a day or two or three to like get your hormonal regulation back in line in terms of, you know, switching from, you know, parasympathetic to sympathetic nervous system. and activating that and getting ready to do hard work. So yeah, resting is hard. But also I think resting is hard because I think a lot of people when they're training and they start to get fatigued, they think, uh-oh, my performance is going down. I need to train more. So you double down. And that leads to the downward spiral of overtraining. I've seen it happen so many times and I've done it myself. It's why I know it's a thing. Um, so, you know, that kind of sucks when it happens, but that's another reason it can be hard to rest. Yeah. And I think too, like I, a lot of people have, have maybe experienced this. You, you're in good shape, you're racing, you had a bad crash and you are kind of out of commission for a couple of weeks and then you dive back in and the first workout or two back. kind of feel hard, but then by like three or four days later, you're like, oh yeah, it's not so bad. Like you have that fear that, oh man, I, you know, I'm going to be completely back to square one and it's just not the case. Yeah, for sure. All right. So second to last question, things that pros do, but hasn't been proved by science yet. So I actually, I like this question a lot. So Kyle, what do you think? I mean, there are tons of stuff. I mean, we might want to talk about like, what does proven by science mean? Well, proven by science, that's another can of worms. I think one of the big things that comes to mind immediately for me, recently some people have been really into those like breath trainer things, which I don't believe have awesome. research histories behind them. And I remember, I think there's been several generations or several iterations of these sorts of things where they become popular for a time being. The idea being that if you wear this and either use it while you're doing relatively low intensity aerobic work or just off aerobic work and specifically focus on breathing through something with resistance, more resistance than like a mask, like something with actually, the idea is that you're going to strengthen your diaphragm, and this will somehow improve your economy, breathing, or somehow improve your aerobic performance. Yeah, well, I mean, and if it works, it is the most marginal of gains. It's one of those things where I totally understand why pros are reaching for those things, because again, they're working already in the maximum number of hours they can possibly ride a bike during the week, or do... a lot of really intense physical activity. So they got to find other things like that. But I think it's yet to be seen whether those things are. Yeah. Well, you know what I think is actually yet to be quote unquote proven by science is most of the ways that cyclists train. Like if you look at FTP, a lot of scientific publications don't quite understand what FTP is supposed to be. Yeah, that's a good point because it's not – rarely, I won't say never, but rarely is someone going to say, how can I adapt this thing from more popular culture and then put it into a scientific publication? Like I think a lot of these things actually get pulled the other way where someone did a study and like Tabata or something like that where someone did – came up with this new intervention and put it through some study group or several study groups and published a paper on it. And then coaches and athletes were like, oh, hey, did you see this paper? Like, maybe we can try this. And it's less likely, I won't say it's impossible, but it's less likely that researchers are, I don't know, scrolling the Training Peaks website and see this thing FTP over and over and over again and then go, oh, we're going to go back and then try to validate this piece of popular fitness culture. Yeah. Well, you know, it's funny you say that because I usually see it the other way where people do something and then science goes, oh, I wonder why this works. Let's do a study on this and like, let's find some way to have a control. And so I think that is... that's the way I usually see it but like the training protocols that I see don't typically reflect what people usually do like like an endurance ride will typically get assigned at like you know one and a half two hours at I don't know 50 to 70 yeah 50 to 60 percent of you to max or something like that and like that's it it doesn't look at The way that a lot of pros actually train. And sometimes when you actually get a small cadre of professional athletes to actually do some of these training interventions, it's like at a really low consequence time of year when they're still doing other training. Or you're trying to do it in between their other training. And so you've got to have a really short protocol based on things like This person's a super well-trained athlete versus this undergrad who's recreationally active. And so your control groups are kind of strange too. And I'm not jealous of these people who have to design these studies because these are hard decisions to make and it's hard to tease out the variables of this kind of stuff. And so what works is typically the domain of descriptive papers. Like, oh, let's look at the training intensities of distribution of, you know, elite U23 athletes or, you know, world tour athletes or, you know, women's world tour races or something like that. And then you've got to decide, how do I divide up the intensity? So is it like, you know, heart rate, you know, percentage of max or is it like, you know, can you do power? Can you do, there's a lot of ways to do it. And so there's definitely like a back and forth, I think, you know what I mean? Between the publications affecting the training and the training affecting the publications. Yeah, that makes sense. So anyway, yeah, so I would say if I had to put my finger on something that things that pros do that hasn't been proven by science yet is nearly everything. Not quite everything, but nearly everything. All right. So yeah. Oh, yeah. Here's that question I was thinking about earlier. Is it possible to get stronger and lose weight at the same time? So we've got two different definitions of getting stronger here. So we'll take it in terms of like actual strength and aerobic strength. So Kyle, let's talk about getting stronger and losing weight in terms of You know, force output, let's call it. Yes. So this is maybe more of your classic, like, I want to look good for beach season type thing. And the answer is yes, it is generally possible to get stronger and lose weight at the same time if you are carrying a significant amount of excess body fat. If you are... Already fairly low body fat, it's going to be much harder to lose additional weight and get stronger in terms of high force production, you know, one rep max type stuff. But it is still somewhat possible, although once you reach very extreme low body fat percentages, it becomes not possible and you have to gain weight. And also, while it is possible, it does not mean that it's optimized and anyone who's ever tried to eat at a slight deficit and go through regular workouts would tell you that the RPE for all of those workouts jumps a lot if you are under fueled. Sure does. Like maybe in a very uncomfortable manner. Oh, man. Oh, yeah. Like every time I try to go on a diet because I'm trying to lose my beer gut slowly. It's not even a beer gut. It's like a ramen gut. Every time I do, like my workouts get so much harder. And it's like, it's hard to be on that knife edge, too. And this actually goes to more aerobic focused stuff, too, which is like, if you are not eating quite enough, you can lose power all over the place. If you're going to have a bad time. Yeah. If you're dieting in a sensible manner. You can aerobically get stronger and lose weight at the same time. It's not impossible. There is a certain duration at which you can really do it. Because at some point your body just starts to rebel and you've got to go, okay, I got to maintain. This sucks. And losing weight too fast is typically when people see like loss of power with loss of body weight. because it's a number on a scale and you're not thinking about glycogen stores or water stores or anything like that that can add mass or subtract mass for that matter. And so typically when I see somebody who's like, yeah, I lost weight and I was doing okay for a little bit, I lost some power, but I'll go in and look at the rate of weight loss and I'm astounded. You lost how many kilos in how long? Like, yeah, no wonder you couldn't maintain that. Like, you know, your body is just like, it's, you've got so many empty cells sending out signals like, fill me up, fill me up. And then you eat and there's, you know, you can like, you can like, you know, I've, I've done this. Like you kind of go into a daze and you wake up and you're like, oh my God, what just happened? You look down, you've got like a spoon and like half a jar of Nutella. Like, where did all this Nutella go? So, yeah, a common tip is you really can't lose more than, like, at most 1% a week healthily, and that's if your only goal is to lose weight, let alone if your goal is to lose weight plus improve your fitness. Like, if you're just going to the gym... Oh, yeah, sorry, I was going to say, actually, maybe it's important to note that, like, the 1% rule... is only for people as fat as me. I am 200 pounds right now, 200, 205, something like that. And so 1% for me is like two pounds. And that's a lot. If I lose two pounds a week, I have to stop after like four weeks because I am- Yeah, and you also- Yeah, I'm in a bad place. You also can't do anything else. You're at a big enough deficit that every day you're like, you know what sounds good? Not eating and scrolling Instagram. You don't have enough energy. Because now you're talking 1,000 calorie deficit a day, which is for someone who weighs 200 pounds, which is a lot. Yeah. And it sucks because your basic activity level, like what's called NEAT, your non-exercise activity thermogenesis, this drops. And so you are losing those calories that you could be burning too. And yeah, like forget trying to work out. So if you're 100 pounds and you're trying to lose 1% of body weight a week, that's like impossible. Don't do that. Yeah, yeah, yeah. The 1% is literally only if your only goal is to lose weight. Yeah. And so the smaller you are, the harder it becomes, you know, regardless of pretty much anything else. Like, because if you're 100 pounds, let's call it 100 and, you know, 100 and... 15 to 130, right? So if you're a 115-pound woman and you're racing bikes, you're probably as light as you could possibly get, in which case you might gain power by gaining weight, eating more. But if you're like, yeah, let's say you're 130, 140 pounds, like losing a pound a week is a big deficit. So you've got to go, all right, what can I lose where I know I'm losing weight? but it's also like sustainable so like you got to go for like a half pound or like you know a quarter of a kilo or something like that where like your scale can actually measure it you know you can do this for two or three weeks and you get out of the you know could be within water weight fluctuation kind of thing and so yeah it gets hard and there's certainly wrong ways to do it and there's right ways to do it too and so working with a really good nutritionist or dietitian is definitely the way to go especially if you tend to Have a good diet, you lose some weight, you maintain power, and then you crash and you rebound really hard. Yeah, for sure. All right, so that's it for our questions. Thanks for sticking in for the long episode. I hope it wasn't too rambly, although it definitely was at some points. I'm sorry about that. Some people have told me that they enjoy the tangents. Shout out to those people, the true believers One of these days, I'm going to take all of the cutting room floor tangents and stick them together in one long episode and make all those people really happy and everybody else very angry So, I'm just kidding, I'm just never going to do that mostly because I don't have the time. Anyway, all right. Thanks everybody for tuning in. So if you want to participate in the AMAs on Instagram, that's at Empirical Cycling. So usually Saturday morning to Saturday evening. Sometimes I'll be as late as Sunday evening if somebody reminds me it's the weekend. So check me out there. and also subscribe to the podcast obviously share the podcast if you want to support us you can do so at empiricalcycling.com slash donate iTunes rating is great thank you all for that and the reviews have been hilarious thank you so much for those and also we've got the show notes we've got the question list up on the website if you have any coaching or consultation inquiries shoot me an email at empiricalcycling at gmail.com and of course if you want to pick up a metal logo empirical cycling logo you can do so at empiricalcyclingpodcast.threadless.com so with that thanks everybody for a great Instagram 2021 and see you in 2022 which has already been happening for over a month because we're late with this so thanks everybody thanks 