Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Kolie Moore. Thank you, everybody, for listening. And if you're new here, consider subscribing if you like what you hear. And for the returning listeners, thanks so much for coming back. We love having you back. And if you want to support the podcast, because we are completely and always will be ad-free, believe me, I could give you a long list of advertisers that we've turned down. Some of them for a decent amount of money. I know a lot of you would understand, but I kind of feel like it would undermine our integrity. We're just not going to do that straight up. So if you want to support the show, empiricalcycling.com slash donate. And of course, if you want to share the podcast, that's a free way to do it, to support us. Thank you so much for all of that. And if you want to participate in what I've been calling our ultimate Patreon, that would be signing up for coaching or consultation. Coaching, we are always taking on clients. We have a range of prices, and for professional athletes and students and juniors especially, we know that a lot of you don't have a ton of money, so we are extremely negotiable on our prices with all of that. And if you've got extenuating circumstances, we still want to help. And if you can't afford coaching or you want to keep coaching yourself, Formal Consultation is the way to go. This is where we sit down for a little while and we look at your files. We look at your warmups. We look at pretty much anything you want to talk about. We can look at metrics. We could talk about that. How do you track your fitness? How do you do race-specific prep like we're talking about today in the podcast? So that's always an option, and pretty much any other thing that you have on your mind. So that's another good way to go. So empiricalcycling at gmail.com if you want to get in touch for any of that. And if you want to ask a question for the podcast, you can do so on my Instagram at empiricalcycling, go figure. And up there in the stories, we have weekend Q&As on training, and we also ask for... Listener Questions on the Podcasts. And we had a bunch of really good ones for this episode. We had like, I don't know, 30-ish. And I culled them down to about 10, 12, 13, something like that, because a lot of them were very, very specific. Should I do this workout for this race? And the answer is, I don't know. Like Alex and I talk about in this episode, we are, oh. I forgot to introduce Alex. He is our longest standing empirical cycling coach besides myself. He started very early with us. I coached him for a little while, and he has been a great coach ever since. And he's somebody who I turn to for advice. He's a really experienced coach. He's a great racer. And it's so nice to have him around for me, for all of our other coaches. Coaching, or, you know, you would understand how it works. Anyway, so Alex is great, and we got a bunch of questions that we answer at the end, but pretty much today what we're talking about is how I think of race-specific prep, and, you know, I'll talk about this in a second as we intro the topic with Alex, but it's more like, what do you do that's not like aerobic fitness, like building FTP and building endurance, things like that? How do you actually prep for doing the hard, specific efforts? Get into too many specifics. We do do definitely some specifics here. We talk about different ways to prep for different events. We talk about some of the soft skills like cornering, things like that. We talk about pacing and RPE. And we also talk about tapering. Tapering is a big one. This is probably the first time in the podcast that we've talked about tapering. We talk about tapering into one-day races and into stage races and high-volume people and low-volume people and amateurs and stress. We talk a lot about stress and how things can go wrong in tapering and race prep off the bike and handling that kind of stuff. So it's a pretty comprehensive discussion on all of the stuff that we think about when we are thinking about tapering, race prep, and all of that. I guess, no, that's not it. So, I don't know what glitched, but my audio, I sound like I'm in a tin can a little bit. It's a little mid-rangey, and I apologize for that. I cleaned it up as really best I could, but, you know, it's an audio file, and those of you who do audio, you know there's not a ton you can do once you get a file like this. But it was such a good conversation, I wanted to keep it and clean it up. It's not unlistenable, it really isn't. But it's not the same. Quality that you are listening to right now. So in just a second, I apologize for the change in the audio quality for myself. Alex sounds fine as usual, but yeah, just wanted to give you a fair warning, and I don't think it's going to take away too much. So last time we had a glitch like this, and I put it out anyway, people said it wasn't that bad. So hopefully it's not that bad. Obviously, I'm very concerned about it, given that I've... rambled on about it for 30 seconds. So anyway, I'm going to shut up, and we're going to get to the main discussion today. So all right, thanks everybody for listening, and I'll catch you on the other side. When I think about race prep, I actually think about periodization a little bit. Normally, you get your off-season, you start building aerobic fitness, low-intensity rides, you build intensity, you do some FTP training, you do some VO2s, which is, to be fair, high-intensity, but it's aerobic-building-focused, right? And now, somebody's got their shiny new FTP after doing some hard work, and they're aerobically really fit, and it's time to start thinking about racing. You've got some early-season races coming up in a couple weeks, like, let's say, maybe... Four to Eight, and we can talk about when we start this kind of thing in a little bit, but I want to talk about what is very general race prep, because I think about race prep like getting ready to do all the hard efforts around training, and I'm on record many times as thinking that many people do too much of this kind of training all year round, but it's not like we can get rid of it. I'm thinking about what's like a... Reasonable dose to get somebody really fit, rather than what's the absolute maximum we can get away with, versus what's the bare minimum that they absolutely need, which is a rare case to be thinking about that. So, like, what's the first workout you would give somebody for race prep to, like, pedal really hard, to, like, smash the pedals, accelerate repeatedly, etc., etc.? That's a good question, kind of like the one. Yeah, like one, like kind of best bang for your buck type workout. Honestly, I think, you know, I almost hate saying this, but I kind of think like a group ride, a Saturday morning group ride. So, you know, something usually, it's not your like weekday group ride, you know, it's longer. You live in Tucson, right? So like you've got the shootout. The shootout, yeah. But the shootout is like kind of psychotically hard. But, you know. I mean, in some ways, yeah, I think even the shootout could be good, because it's like, you know, that one's about 100k, you know, 60-something miles. Yeah, if you can keep up, because I've got people on my roster in Tucson also, and, you know, and they go to the shootout, and they're like, you know what, maybe I'll save not the shootout. Yeah. Like, that's not a good first, you know, group ride back. But I actually really like group ride as an answer. Like, that is... That's a way better answer than I had. Yeah, I mean, you're getting, because I think like races, right, you're looking at, unless you're doing time trials, you're looking at two aspects, like, yeah, the physiological side, having to go hard, et cetera, and then you're looking at all the pack skills, handling skills, yeah, those, which is like arguably as if not more important, you know, so I think group rides check both those boxes, especially if it's like you've been riding the trainer all winter and haven't been. Riding with anyone, you know, like, do you know how to handle your bike? Do you know how to handle your bike if it's windy? Like, these are really important things that I think are a necessity, like a must, before you, like, line up at an actual mass start race. So, and I think, too, like, it's a good way to say, see, like, okay, you know, I've been smashing away on the trainer all winter or riding by myself or whatever, and then, you know, you're put up against a bunch of, ideally, your peers are just other riders, and then you can see, okay, like, How well am I going? How unfit am I? Or maybe I'm pretty fit. And then that can help kind of maybe, yeah, just give you an idea of where you're at and going into racing. Yeah, that's true. And actually, one of the things that I think that that kind of thing would really help with is identifying... Weaknesses for a person, because somebody might be really good at accelerating repeatedly just off, like, you know, regular base training and aerobic building versus somebody might be not so good at that and they need a little specific prep or, you know, somebody goes like, oh, I felt great until, you know, X duration into the ride and it's like, well, okay, we'll just need to get you doing these more and it'll come back, like that kind of stuff. So, yeah, it's a really good assessment tool. I agree, yeah. Yeah, no, I think, and I think with the things you mentioned, yeah, I didn't even think about, but I think are really true. It's like, you might be pretty fit, and you might be doing well if you last to the end. It's like, okay, that's great. I'm actually not that unfit. But then it can also shed or bring to light what you really need to work on. Yeah, you might realize that I forgot how to eat on a group ride. Yeah. I forgot how much I have to drink. Oh, my God, I'm so dehydrated. Exactly. Oh, yeah. Yeah, because my answer is 30-30s. I love 30-30s as a first workout back because I think for two reasons. You can do as many sets as you want or don't want to. You can do one set of five minutes, 30-30s, and that could be enough for an entire week. for a lot of people to get started. But you could also sag it a little bit. You can pull back the pacing. You don't have to do them full gas, like I would usually assign. You could do them full gas. You could do two or three, four, five, six, if you're really going strong. Later, you can build on that kind of workout. Or you could morph it into any other number of things. But that's one of my very favorites to start out with early season. Yeah, I mean, I agree. I think, especially coming from the off-season, not really racing much, I'd say that's the biggest thing you're not really getting or, yeah, just the repeatability, the hard, repeated efforts. It's like, that's probably the most race-specific things. Erasing is like, yeah, you're put in these situations where you're having to go hard, you know, continually, repeatedly. Yeah, you're just not going to get that sort of training, just working on your aerobic fitness or whatever. Yeah, like there's only so many FTP intervals you can do. There's also a rarity of riders out there, like Coach Katie is one of them, where she can actually do pretty much steady state FTP training and be fine to race no matter what. I have a couple other pro clients, a couple of whom are anonymously coached. So we're not going to mention names. They can do just steady state riding, and that helps them the most, and they need one or two workouts like this, and then they are ready to race. It's a rare thing. Most people need a lot more work on it than that. And especially, this kind of prep that we're talking about can work for gravel, it can work for road racing and criteriums, it can work for track racing, just raise the cadence a little bit, and there's a lot of ways that you can manipulate this kind of stuff. Especially if you're doing track racing and you want to do higher cadence stuff, group ride is okay, but it's not amazing. You're not like, oh, my cadence is only 90 RPM, I need to be at 120 plus right now. But you're going uphill and you're in your smallest gear, so what are you going to do? But also, let's think about different types of racing and seasons too, because When you start the hard efforts matters too, right? So you and I both have clients who do early spring road racing, gravel racing in the summer, they do cross in the winter, and then they get from like December or January through February or March to like chill. So where do you actually start the race prep and like what kind of and like what's the balance between? Racing and doing actual specific hard training. Right. This is such a good question, and I mean, honestly, one I've thought about a lot, and I think... I think we all think about it a lot. Yeah. I think so, especially the riders. I mean, I do, granted, I have some riders who, like, only have a handful of events a year, whether it's due to where they live in the country or just how busy they are, but I also have, like, a bunch of riders. Especially you New York City people who are just like inundated with race days or group ride days, whatever. Yeah, they start early too, like for New York City. It's really early. And it goes late into the year and it's like, so when are we actually doing our like race, you know, specific workouts? Are we even doing them? You know, like I think it's really made me think about that a lot. And I think to be honest. I think generally where I'm thinking of how I think about it now is if you're looking at racing I mean I had some people in New York they started in February and then they had stuff going on especially people didn't cross through the fall that's so long and so I think in that case if you're looking at a really long season I think the race prep stuff is You need to be really choosy and careful about it. Because if you're doing already so much intensity from all your races and stuff, I mean, that's probably going to be enough. And if those race high intense events that you're doing aren't, I guess you could be risking either not focusing on what you really need to improve and just, you know, racking up a lot of fatigue. I forgot the other thing I was going to mention there, but basically like if you need to work on, you know, X, whatever specific thing, let's say, yeah, repeatability or, you know, maybe power around a minute and everything you do, you know, all these hard things you're doing don't help with that at all, then you're not really helping yourself get any stronger or better at your target events. Yeah, it's weird because as somebody goes into the season, I think especially early in my racing career, I was very much like this where As I fatigued, I thought I was getting less fit. I didn't realize that they look like the same thing, because your performance is dropping, and that's what we're thinking about. And so, it's like, a lot of people will think, oh, I need to do more hard training. And it's really, you've got to go the opposite way and think about, like, how are you feeling? So, like, give me one or two things that you use besides somebody saying, my legs feel good or my legs feel bad, like, that you use to decide. Whether or not somebody's ready to go after, let's say they did like three or four, maybe even five or six, like hard race weekends in a row that were like a moderate priority, and now they need a rest. So like, what does the rest look like before you get them into hard training again? Hard training. That's a good question. I mean, I think this, you know, things like. Well, you know, where ride motivation is at, like, do you even want to go ride today? You know, honestly, I really love when someone almost gets bored, and they're like, can I train hard? Can I do that? That to me is always such a good indication. I would rather someone get like, yeah, almost build up that surplus of like, I want to go really hard, or I want to train hard. That also really points to a mental readiness, which I think is so huge in this, because I've seen with those riders who've been racing all season long, they don't really want to train hard when it's getting towards the end of the season. They're like, I'm not going to push myself past my threshold. I just refuse. Yeah. And they can't, or it doesn't feel good at all. So they're like, fuck that. I'm going to motor. That's it. Exactly. So, I don't know. I think a good amount of mental Mental Freshness, so maybe that means like, oh, there's this group ride I would usually do on the weekends, and maybe I'm going to say, well, maybe we just do some volume or easy endurance, and then that way, come time next weekend, you're like, oh, I really want to do the ride, or I really want to do the race. Yeah, yeah, a little extra riding easy, always, it never goes out of style, really, unless somebody's like actually sick, and you know, somebody wants to ride, it's like, okay, go ride, but. I usually tell people don't ride any harder than feels good. And like the last thing that really comes in line in terms of feeling good is like over like riding over FTP, like pushing hard repeatedly over FTP. And so like if somebody's and for me, the big one is like accelerating or going upstairs where you get into those big motor units. And if they are very grumpy to do that kind of stuff, like I need to know that because that's a really big sign of fatigue. Totally. And I think too, sometimes, let's say specifically, like you said, if you've been racing every weekend for five or six weeks, that first week that you might be taking easy, you might feel relatively fine. But I would still say, hey, weekend time, you might be feeling recovered, but let's keep it easy before we get into intensity. Yeah. And I like to think that if somebody's feeling fine at that point, it's either that they're... They're more fit than they need to be for the races, which is always a good thing. It means that they're probably going well and ready to get a big result or something like that. Or it just means that we've done a good job maintaining fitness and the balance during a hard block like that. Yep. Definitely. So let's talk about progression. of race-specific stuff. So like general to specific. So I've got a kind of scheme in my head of like a very general race-specific plan that I'll kind of lay out in very general terms and then you can give me your thoughts on it or kind of tell me how you think about it. So I usually think about like capacity and then power and then race specificity. So capacity being like short, repeated efforts with very incomplete rests. And then I want to switch to kind of something in the middle, where we do big power, but also incomplete rests, but longer than before. So we'll go from like 30-30 to like two, three, four, five minute rests. And then we're going to go to big rest. I want you to give me as much as you got for like 30 seconds, and then I want you to sit on your ass or spin easy for like 20 minutes while track racers sit on their ass. And then you give me like a couple of those, and I want to see absolute max power with full recovery. And then we'll think about what does your race need in terms of power output and specific performance things, like if it's Criterion with a hill or if it's... You know, like a road race with like a repeated eight-minute climb or something like that. Like that's the kind of stuff where I want to think, okay, now we can take all this, you know, all the aerobic stuff, that foundation, then all the hard stuff, the hard stuff foundation, and now we can get somebody used to the pacing and the whatever. So that's my general thought process. So like, you know, how does your thought process line up? And because I know we all... kind of approach it very similarly in empirical cycling, but I love the thought process because it is actually very different for a lot of us to achieve the same thing. Yeah, totally. I mean, yeah, I like what you said about, you know, starting with some, like, again, 30-30s where it's like, this can basically benefit anyone in, like, any intense, you know, whatever situation, race or not. But I think, too, I think I would approach things similarly as you, but also really, Take into consideration the rider's own strengths and weaknesses. For example, I mean, a rider maybe who has fantastic 30-second to one-minute power, maybe we're not even going to do that. Maybe we really need to keep working on threshold. Maybe that's really what's holding them back. So I think, yeah, when approaching race-specific prep, yeah, of course, the more specific, like, you know, high-intensity stuff like you just mentioned is important. I want to also think about what's going to hold this rider back the most. Like, does this rider need to stick a brake? Is that the type of rider that is? Well, if they can't stick the brake, then, you know, then it's like, that's, yeah. Or do they even want to be in the brake? Are they a butt sprint person? Right. And, you know, are they getting dusted in the final, like, 50 meters? Do they just not have that gas in the tank? Or, yeah, like you said, are they just not getting to the end? Or, like, what's the aerobic thing happening? So, I mean, like, I seriously wish that I were starting right now and working with you because I had these issues with my early coaches because I had an aerobic weakness. And I had a good strength in my sprinting, and I was just never really able to put it together. And I also just discovered that my heart murmur actually was holding my VO2 max back by potentially quite a bit. Oh, God. Oh, jeez. So, anyway, that's all fun stuff. But I wish I had somebody like you to actually think about that kind of stuff, because, you know, I think you knew both of my early... My early coaches on the road where like a lot of the, it was like a lot of race specific stuff. I mean, that's, that's a lot of where I got my, you know, train too hard for criteriums idea from. It's like my early experiences and then seeing it happen with other people. You know? Yeah. I mean, I think in my own experience, yeah, it's like seeing people who have, for example, a great sprint and they love training the sprint. They love smashing in the group ride and, you know, doing what they do best. But it's like, kind of like you were saying, it's they're not getting to the race where they need to be. They're already gassed. They're not able to really stick it out in the last five to ten minutes of a crit, for example. So, you know, and I think, honestly, I mean, I know we always are, like, talking about the necessity of, you know, Aerobic Fitness and FTP and stuff, I feel like we're big on that, but I feel like, yeah, that's, the importance there can't be understated, like, even, and you've talked about this before, even for crits, even stuff where you're like, oh, you just need to be able to sprint really well, it's like, no, like, there's so much more there, so, yeah, what's gonna hold you back, you know? Yeah, and that's, I think that's a really good way to start thinking about specific race prep, and so, So before we started recording, I asked you to come up with a couple examples of a specific race prep, and I've got a couple as well. And so I'll talk about one first. Cool. Which is a time trial, a specific prep for a time trial. So this is the Nationals time trial that's been held in Knoxville for the last, was it eight years or something? And it was a weird time trial because... It's like flat up and down a river, or next to a river, not in the river, of course. That would be fun, though, like on a swan boat or something. Or you do on the road, next to the river, and there were a couple little climbs in this. Like there was a short climb, then you come down, then you go back on the thing, then you go down. This is the one for the last couple of years. Then you go down a little bit, you take it right up into what's called the neighborhood, because there's a bunch of... Houses up there, and somebody in those houses put up some signs about how much they really enjoyed having the cyclists around the course. And then you come down from the neighborhood and you're back onto the flat and you do it all again. You do that like two and a half, three times or something like that. So it's a weird time trial where you've got to push, well, you've got to have your pacing right, but you've also got to be able to push up those two climbs as you go over them like throughout the course. And so it's not just like steady holding power. You've got to go uphill, you've got to go downhill, you've got to nail some corners, you've got to know where you've got the whole road, where it's the yellow line rule. And so for a specific prep, I had people starting out with sub-max pacing on that course. I had them load it into a simulator and then ride that at moderate pace or adjust their weight in it so they're normally fast or whatever it is. and build up the pace on it. And then at some point it was like doing full gas efforts on that just to, you know, break it up into a lap or a couple laps. But it was like really, really pacing specific prep more than just thinking about like, I got to do X power here and X power here because on race day, hopefully you can exceed what you've done in the past, you know? So that was a specific race prep I did for a TT. That was for pretty much anybody who went there. Yeah. So, alright. Thoughts on that, and then what's yours? I mean, yeah, I like it. I think, and I was talking about this with somebody the other day, specifically like crit, and actually also cross races where it's like you maybe are comfortable taking corners or whatever, navigating a course at a certain speed, but that's not going to be the speed you're racing at. Let's get you in a situation where you're approaching, you know, corners or course obstacles, whatever, at race speed. And I think that's, I think that alone is, the importance of that cannot be understated. And I think that's a huge, huge glaring hole in a lot of people's training. I think my own for many years, you know, and kind of like you're saying, it's not a matter of just holding X amount of watts for X amount of time. Yeah, well, because you're thinking about something that I see a lot of the time where, like, if riders slide out, you know, you're watching the, what do you call it? The Pro Crit Series? I forget the name of it. American Criterium Cup. Thank you. It changes every, like, one to two years, and it's impossible to keep track of. Yeah. But you're watching that, and then, you know, women's race and men's race both, I've seen this happen, where somebody slides out in, like, on the last lap. because last lap is where the speed is the highest and you don't know where your new braking point is or you're going faster and you miss it or something like that. Like, even if you're holding the wheel, the person ahead of you can corner at this, like, you know, two, three, four miles an hour faster than you at this corner and you don't know how to handle your bike or your tire pressure is too high, something like that. And so, yeah, like race pace specific prep. Like, you're right, that is so, so, so important. So how would you advise somebody to go about to do something like that? Like, because I assume most people don't have access to their favorite crit course while it's not, you know, roped up and fenced off. Yeah. Oh, yeah, I know. And this is another really good question that really scratched my head about is also just someone who's, like, jumped into doing national ever crits in the last few years. I'm just like, there's, I've raced, you know, hundreds of times. And I don't want to say none of this got me ready for these situations, but I'm like, you know, there's so much I was lacking here. So I think, yeah, okay, so if we're looking at like crits, higher level crits, you know, wanting to just, yeah, I mean, just generally be better at racing crits, I think. And even if, let's say, you don't necessarily know the courses that you're going to be racing on, I mean, I think ideally. Number one, what's the course like? Is it, does it have turns? How many turns? What kind of turns? Camber changes, surface changes. Sure, exactly. Joe Martin crit when it goes from like that, that raised crosswalk with the bricks and then it's like off camber on the outside and you're like, oh, where'd it go? Exactly. I love that course. But yeah, and I think, you know, I think just as best you can. You know, one thing I love is, and I did this with Athens, actually. I was able to pre-ride the course at Athens, which is just a monster of a course. And, you know, there's a screaming downhill into, kind of like a Joe Martin, into a tight left turn where the road you're turning onto is like barely one lane each way, like a really narrow road. And so I was like, damn, I'm gonna have to take this thing at like... You know, close to 40 miles an hour and not die. But, and I think, and this is something I've kind of realized, it's like literally teaching and training your nervous system to be like, I'm going to fly at this thing so fast, but everything's going to be okay. I am going to be fine. And honestly, You know, I think a great thing, and what I did was found a downhill, similar downhill, where I'm going real fast, in like a, you know, quiet neighborhood, obviously, and start taking that turn faster and faster and faster and faster, and then, while at the same time telling yourself, it's gonna be okay, I'm gonna be fine, everything is okay, and then, you know, you'll notice you're not... Gripping your bars as tight, you're not tensing up, you're relaxing, and you're taking that corner faster and smoother, and then over time, your body learns, okay, this movement is okay, I can do this. And so, honestly, personally, I found this to be really helpful, especially for those who are not just natural, fearless, crazy people who can just throw themselves into insane situations. It's like, you gotta just literally train your body. So, yeah, so I think, again, Going back, looking at the demands of the course, and then training specifically for that, you know, so high-speed cornering, I think is, I mean, just for any racing, I think, start taking corners as fast as you can. That's going to help you so much. Yeah. And then I think other part of that is pack skills, you know, taking corners fast, navigating. Tight courses over that with a lot of people around you. And so I think this is where like practice crits, even group rides can be really helpful in getting, you know, used to that. And again, training your body to be okay with riding really close and tight with people. I think especially for newer riders, this is like a huge thing to work on and a big thing that I've seen. So I think the more you can do that in the off seasons, you know, the better you'll, better place will be come race time. So, I mean, these are both two off-the-bike things, or not off-the-bike, not necessarily, like, power or strength focused, but I, again, I just think the importance of these things cannot be understated, and I think, personally, it's something I didn't pay enough attention to. I was like, oh, I'm just going to train really hard, you know, ride my bike all the hours, and I'll just, it'll all work out, and it's like, no, if you cannot race the course, you're going to go nowhere. So yeah, I mean, that's like, um, uh, remember the game Starcraft? That was my Starcraft strategy, because I didn't know how to do the strategy. I would just like sit there and amass zerglings. Cause I, and I still suck at strategy games. I'm, I'm terrible at them. And so I, well, that's why I don't play them anymore, but like, you know, that's why I suck at chess, like, but I can't amass zerglings in chess. That would be kind of cool crossover, but like, um, but you're right. Cause the, You know, we've talked about this on the podcast many times before, where I call it soft skills. You know, like, what kind of line are you taking? Like, can you relax in this? Can you hold the draft? And, you know, all those things matter a lot when it's, like, not something that shows up in WKO5. Yeah. Which is why, you know, like, any time any one of my clients has a GoPro and they send me their GoPro footage, I flip through it and I... I watched the last couple laps and I look at their cornering early on and all that kind of stuff and I can give them really specific critiques on what they're doing wrong that somebody doesn't necessarily know when they're just going out and doing it, which is why I wish when I was racing I had a GoPro because I would have seen a million things. You don't even have to have a coach look at your stuff, just look at it yourself. It's like when you're in the gym and you record yourself because you're doing squats for the first time in however many months. And then you look at your form after and you're like, oh, God. And then a couple weeks later, you're like, all right, this is looking good. This is looking solid. But it's because you've checked yourself on it. Yep. So my second race-specific prep was similar to the first one, but it was for a road race. So this was a road race in the UK where it was 13 laps. And if you're from the UK, you know exactly which race this was. 13 laps of about a minute and a half hill, pretty steep, and the race happens over the course of about four-ish hours. And so this is one where we didn't want to do too much race prep, because it's not about pacing. Right? Because you're racing the people more than you're racing yourself at this one. And so you've got to at least be ready to smash up a hill as hard as you can, 13 times, you know, with like, what, 15, 20-minute breaks in between. Well, quote-unquote, breaks. It's racing, so there's never actually a break. Unless a break goes up the road, in which case, you just hope you're ready. So, what I did was, about six weeks out, I wanted to give my client three specific prep days on a course similar to or that exact course, because in some cases he was able to actually go make it to the course. And so the first day was about six weeks ahead of time, and I'm trying to find it in TrainingPeaks. It was this one. So, oh yeah. It was, basically this was an FRC workout, where it was like one minute efforts, like one to one and a half minute efforts, with full rests in between, and we just started them out, because race day is 10, or no, race day was 13, the first one we started with, I gave them 7 to 10, and then the second one, we built them up to 10 to 12, and then another one, We had longer rests to start, so it was like 20 minutes rest. Then we pulled it down to 15 like it was going to be on race day. So it was like, you know, less reps for longer, then we pull the rest down and do more reps, and then, you know, finally we do exactly what's going to happen on race day. So that was like three specific workouts over the course of about six weeks, so approximately one every two weeks, even though it didn't exactly work out that way. And the last prep day before that race was... Let's see, this one, this one, nope, I went right past it, sorry. I know, scrolling is really fun to listen to, isn't it? So the last prep day was one, about two and a half weeks beforehand, and that was actually the closest that we could get because he had race, race, race, race, race, race. I was going to say, too, I mean, that's not an easy workout. No, it's not. I mean, you're probably, what else was the rest of the week looking like? I imagine not terribly hard, especially if he's racing. Yeah, exactly. So that last race prep workout, he had a, the previous week, he had one of his early season goal races, but we didn't do any specific prep for it. It was really just a race where you need experience, and he had had plenty of experience, and he ended up on the podium, got some ECI points. But that week was like, Easy Endurance on Monday, Tuesday Recovery, Wednesday Recovery, Thursday, Medium Endurance with Crit, Friday, Saturday, Easy. So, pretty chill week overall, and the volume besides the race was actually fairly low for him. And then the next week, it was day off, day off, recovery ride, and some openers, and then... He had prep day, like his final prep, because I didn't want him to rest too long. He was feeling pretty good by that Wednesday, so Thursday it was go time. Yeah, and I mean, I think an important thing to note with work like that is, you know, ideally to do it well, or maybe let's say get the most benefit from it, you want to go into it fresh. Anything, you know, anaerobic or like that, short or like that, it's just like you want to go into it fresh. Yeah. And also know if you're the person who needs openers. Like I always needed like a two, three hour easy ride with like a couple full gas sprints, like 10 to 15 seconds, like max power. That always opened me up really well. And if I rest the day before race, I was screwed. Sure. Yeah. I mean, yeah, I think, and I've seen, I think different where it's like, if I were to give that workout to someone, it's like. you know several easy days and then roll them into that just after the easy days and they're gonna go so hard and hurt so bad afterwards but in a way that's kind of what you want exactly unless unless you're working on the pacing if you know somebody can do the full gas do the full gas like there's because when you can when it comes to race day his actual comment on race day let me Oh, he texted it to me. He didn't put in his training peaks, but he pretty much said it was easier than all the prep sessions. Yeah. That's what you want. That's really what you want. Exactly. I believe it. Yeah. Yeah. You want to be, yeah, that's, and that's what I alluded to earlier, having like extra fitness, like more than you needed. That's the kind of thing where you want that extra fitness because, you know, on race day, you need to have way better likes than you thought you did. Exactly. Yeah. So, all right, there's my second example. So, where is yours? Alright, I gotta, you know, say a longer one, and then it's for stage race prep, but I think as someone who's enjoyed stage racing myself, I think this is a fun one for me, so I had someone this year do the Green Mountain stage race for the first time, and he dabbles in road racing, but not a ton, he's more of a cross racer, so this was kind of like a new demand for him, and it honestly went really well, so Yeah, so I'll share this. I'll tell you not to use an example if it didn't go well. Actually, I'm just kidding. That would be actually really informative to figure out how we would have done it differently or how we would do it differently next time. Yeah, I mean, that's a really interesting thing to pose. I mean, I could get into that, but I feel like probably something with the rest. or non-training things got in the way, would be my biggest, my first thought, but anyway. Yeah, well actually, that brings up more of my thoughts on stuff like this. We're going to talk about that next. Exactly. So, yeah, and so I think going to this, you know, his goal was to finish the race, be able to get, be able to complete each day, you know, strong, you know, finish. Decently by the end. Um, but you know, obviously you can get into that, you know, there's probably multiple ways to approach stage races, whether it's, you know, if you're going for GC, if you're looking at individual days, um, whatever. Um, so this, this approach is more just like, let's finish the whole thing strong. Um, so we started our prep out, um, we started our prep about, um, about six weeks out. Um, and what we did might've been like a little longer, but I'd say generally six to eight weeks, maybe if you can. What we started to do is clump together, you know, two to three days of workouts in a row. So his schedule is a bit demanding, and I think in the summertime, given that his focus is cross, we're not often training both weekend days. That way he can, like, have a life and do other stuff and go into cross feeling fresh. Yeah, that's smart. And not overtaxed. Yeah. So, but we, you know, we really wanted to do GMSR, so, you know. We had to start doing, you know, let's say both weekend days, we were looking at doing workouts, maybe Friday, Saturday, and then again, adding a third day from there. So, and in this, and we weren't even getting race-specific yet necessarily, it was maybe our, you know, clumping together tempo days, you know, maybe two tempo days and then a long ride, stuff like that. But that just, I think, is a good way to help lay the foundation for, you know, four days in a row. Workout Weekends or something like that. And then so I think it was about three to four weeks out. Sorry, three weeks out, we did a full-on kind of like race simulation weekend. Actually, I'm going to hold you up for half a second because for our listener questions, I cut these out so we're not actually going to answer them because it was a little too specific or slash general. We'll get to that in a little bit. But somebody had asked about training camps. Before races. And so what you're about to talk about would answer somebody's question to some degree on that kind of stuff, like how far out to do a training camp, et cetera, et cetera. Yeah. Yeah. And I mean, we did three weeks out, you know, just because that's what his schedule allowed. But I think three to four, even, you know, three to five weeks out, probably no less than three weeks. Yeah. Because you don't want to fuck with the recovery because you don't know. It should be. You know, harder training than normal, right? And you want to make sure somebody's got all that runway to freshen up and, you know, it's easy to maintain, but you can't rush the recovery. Exactly. Yep. Um, and so, in, okay. And so, so what we did is, um, sorry, I'm looking at my notes here. Oh, sure. Um, yeah. So for, for him, he was doing other races as well. He did some, um, I think a crit up in New Hampshire and then like a Wells Ave, which is a practice crit. So, I mean, you look at those and you're like, well, that's not necessarily stage racing or meeting the exact demands of Green Mountain, but I think in this sort of situation, you can kind of use stuff like practice races to, you know, still prep you for like, let's say just four hard days of racing. So Friday, we did like a pretty straightforward threshold day, and that kind of doubled as like openers for the crit on Saturday. Race the crit Saturday full gas, and then Sunday practice crit, but we did endurance riding before and after, and that acted kind of as this really big day. Yeah, I love doing stuff like that. Race plus endurance, just perfect. Exactly, exactly, I agree. And then Monday, so we're rolling into Monday, pretty tired, which is great. That's Green Mountain, you're rolling into the crit, you're fried from APGAP the previous day, and all the other days of racing. So that was good. And what we ended up doing was, I think kind of like a threshold with jumps type workout. So, you know, riding at a round tempo threshold, and this was by RP, and adding in, you know, an all-out sprint, like every other minute. Um, which I think is fairly crit-specific, but basically it was that until he couldn't anymore. You know, I think it was maybe like, we assigned like three to five intervals. It was basically just like, just go until you can't push any power anymore. Um, and so that was, yeah, that was one weekend we did. And I think, again, you, I guess my point there is like, you don't necessarily have to, I think in an ideal world, you're like, Mimicking or mirroring the demands of the specific race you're doing in your training. But I think also for more time or constrained racers, you can get that stimulus via different ways. You don't have to just say, I have to just stick to my sterile training plan all weekend and can't do the race I want to do. And yeah, my athlete ended up having a great race. Came into the crit feeling super strong, moved up a bunch in GC actually after the crit. Nice. And the weekend was a success. And GMSR, that crit day, you know, it's very common to lose the yellow jersey. It's very common to lose. You know, five minutes in that crit. Like, it's not unheard of. It's so easy because it's so fast. It's so narrow at some points. It's technical. There's a chicane. There's manhole covers. There's potholes. There's, you know, bricks and cobbles. And when it gets wet, like, whoo-hoo. Oh, God. No, thank you. No, no. And actually, that reminds me why we did those two crits during his prep weekend. is because he doesn't race a lot of crits. And the GMSR crits is really hard. So it's like, okay, no, we need to get these crits in. That's going to be a huge part of you doing well overall at the race. So, yeah. Smart. Wicked smat. Wicked smat, kid. I hope everyone can tell that we grew up in Boston. I'm sure you can. Yeah, I'm sure. It's subtle, but... Well, I think it's more subtle for you, because you moved around a little bit, I think, and I was there for 20 years. Forever. 20 years. 20 years. I was swinging a hammer up on those carpentry jobs. Oh, yeah. If you're working out with carpenters and... Oh, God. I'm sure it's just made it worse. Oh, my God. I love this. Oh, man. All right. So we already touched on this a little bit, but the last little bit I want to touch on before we get into listener questions is tapering strategies. And so how do you do it differently for a one-day race versus a stage race? Or do you? Because for some people on my roster, Like, there's no difference, and for some people, there's quite a big difference. Not huge, but like, there is a difference. Yeah. So, where are you at with this? Yeah, I mean, I guess I'll start with the stage race taper strategy. I mean, I think, you know, what we did, and I think generally, maybe good rule of thumb, is about two-ish weeks out. Yeah, I think about two weeks out is when you really start to like... Change what training looks like. So you're not following, you know, maybe I do three harder workouts a week or something like that. Maybe you're just doing two harder workouts. But I think generally it's like, you know, a general approach would be keeping your volume maybe more or less the same, but then tapering down your intensity. And I think in some instances maybe Keeping that race focus and specificity as you get close to the race. So maybe, you know, two weeks out, you might have a threshold or something workout. And that's kind of like, I would say, maybe like a top-up slash also race-specific workout. And then maybe you have like a B or C race that weekend. Yeah. And then... And so we're two weeks out again, right? Yeah, sorry, two weeks out. And then I'd say the week before is like keeping volume the same. Maybe, well, I guess it depends on what your training has looked like, but maybe you're doing a race. Yeah, if somebody's doing eight hours, yeah, you probably want to keep doing eight hours. But if somebody's doing like 20, 25, it's like maybe we'll think about a reduction, maybe not. Yep, exactly. Yeah, I agree. And then I was gonna say too, maybe weekend before. I think if you're racing and training a lot, sure, a race or, like, a harder day may be fine, but some people, it's like, no, we're going to do, like, a low-key tempo workout, or we're going to just do, like, a long ride, you know, a tempo workout Saturday, long ride Saturday, and then, you know, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, recovery, and then openers the day before the start of the race. Yeah. For me, most of my clients going to stage races, it's, well, because a lot of them are American, I've got the American kind of stage race calendar in my head already, and what actually ends up happening is you end up, the stage races that you have done end up being the training for the subsequent stage races. So it's like, so last year it was, Well, basically, Nationals is a stage race. So it was like Redlands, Gila, Joe Martin, and then Nationals. But this year, Nationals is 2024. Nationals is the week, I think it's the exact week before Joe Martin or two weeks before. So that is a little bit of a more crunch time schedule, but it's like you do Redlands, but like tapering into Redlands is actually a little dicey a lot of the time because it's the first stage race of the year for a lot of people. First big one anyway, because like Valley of the Sun, Tucson Bicycle Classic, these are like two, three days, and they're quite short. So the demands are kind of there, but also kind of not. Pro Teams, a lot of people do a training camp in the Valley of the Sun, so that is a little different, because we don't get a say in what happens at training camp, that's all team runs, so you're just like, they're like watching the files come in every day and hear in the comments and going, oh, I hope it's not too hard. Oh my god, yeah. But then if it is, you're not mad, because it's like, okay, now we know we need some rest after this. Exactly. So that happens all the time. But typically going into stage races, I want somebody a little more fresh as a general rule. So I'll probably think about a couple days easy, like three to four. But you typically don't want to do more than that, especially if your training volume and intensity has already been high up to that point. And then just kind of let somebody do the openers as they see it, because a lot of people have so much race experience. I don't want to fiddle with openers too much because chances are I'm going to tell somebody to do something wrong. It's better if they just sort it out the day before, I'm sure, like you've done many times. Anyway, that's kind of like my stage race tapering strategy, which is not really tapering. It's just like a little bit of rest into the race. Because most of the time, the week before, people have been... Training, but one of my favorite strategies heading into a stage race, or pretty much any race, is to maintain the intensity, but what I'm going to do is I'm going to add rest days. So the hard days are going to stay hard, but the medium days go down to easy days. And so whether we've got two or three of those, maybe I'll just come down to two hard days a week, and I'm just going to make sure that person kind of rolls easy otherwise, and that usually is not a bad strategy at all. Yeah, I honestly, I really like that. I really agree. I mean, cause you're not, with so few days, you're gonna be fresh and like, you know, you can't have that approach to training all the time cause that's just not enough stimulus, but rolling into a stage race or a big event, I think that's perfect. Um, and the other thing I was gonna say too is, um, you know, usually if you're going to a stage race, you're traveling a bunch, especially for Gila, Joe Martin, um, we're to Redlands and you've, like you were mentioning, you've already been at training camps, you've already been traveling a bunch. That really cannot be discounted. The added stress, lack of sleep. You're sleeping in places you don't usually sleep. Maybe your food's off. I've had athletes really face that a bunch this past year. So I think really in the days leading up, really being mindful of that. I have to be able to eat the calories. I need to be able to eat. I need to get the rest. I need to get, you know, need to get. How am I going to really strategize? You need to not be stressed. and not being stressed as much as possible. You need to have your bag. Exactly. You've got your bike bags there. You've got to have your shoes. Yeah. I mean, this is like, and this is people who do this stuff a lot. Oh, yeah. Thinking about the average amateur who does a stage race like once a year, maybe if that, every year or two or three even, like this is all new to them. And so the stress level going into a race like that is. Unbelievable. Yep. Especially if somebody's not amazing at traveling, you know, you don't, you don't realize you got to pack your shoes in your carry-on because if your bag is lost, you can, you can borrow a bike, but you're, nobody's got those like form fit shoes that you like so much. Exactly. Stuff like that. You can borrow a helmet, you can borrow a kit. Yeah, so. And I mean. Yeah, sorry, go ahead. I don't know, I was gonna say that's why, you know, the best and the pros are, do so well. It's because they're not, Staying Up Late, Cleaning and Prepping Their Bike, Making Food for Tomorrow, Washing Their Stuff, Pinning Their Stuff. Yeah, the support staff makes all the ice socks and cleans the bikes. I'm pointing to myself right now. Exactly. And so, I mean, as someone who's really meticulous about my bike and having to do all this stuff on my own, you know, I think... Man, I would really roll into stuff often not as fresh as I wish I could have been because I was up late the previous night prepping and having to work and do all these things. So I think pro move, you know, trying to plan ahead as much as you can for that. So I'm going to make sure my bike is tip-top several days out or I'm going to do the prep and packing. several days out or whatever. Really just minimizing stress leading up to the race as much as possible. This is something that you were getting towards earlier, which is that during a taper, the thing that gets you the most is not on the bike. The thing that gets you the most is all the stress around the event, like getting to the event. Sometimes there's team drama. Sometimes they lost your bike drama. You've got to ride a neutral bike. The saddle's too low and your knee hurts. And this is all just stuff that's happened in the last year to my clients. And so having a flexible tapering strategy matters a lot. And this is another reason, again, why we coach only individually fully. We don't do training plans. We don't restrict communication. It's like, what do you need? Let us know. Let us help you. Because the number of times that I've seen training plans that would have done a 180 from like, Too much to, this is a great plan, it's going to work for somebody, the difference is just being able to adjust and talk to your coach. Yeah. Exactly. And I think another aspect of that that used to remind me of, I had someone who was going into his A-race, which was like a 100-mile gravel race, and had like a family emergency pop-up, like, he's either like the week before or like two weeks out, like right in the middle of... It always happens. Yeah, that's why I never raced to MSR. I had a family emergency come up like two years in a row and I was like, I don't want to kill anybody else in my family. I've just got to stop trying to go to this race. Exactly. But, you know, we had been prepping for weeks. So even though it was kind of at a crucial time, you know, two weeks out, it was like, well, 80% of the work, if not more, is there and we can pivot around this. And, you know, we were able to do that. Yeah, you can't panic train. Yeah. Oh, no. No, no, no. And I think that was the biggest thing I was there for. Honestly, I was like, I know you're freaking out because you're like, my race is like very close, but I had to be like, everything's going to be fine. You've trained, you are fit, like it's going to be okay. And it was, he did great. Alex, you are the lighthouse in the storm for so many people. My pleasure. All right, let's talk about one days, because that's a little bit different, at least in my head, for most people on average. Yeah. And so heading into one days, I actually taper a lot less depending on the nature of the race. So if the race is really short, and like, I mean, like a short hill climb, a kilo, something like that, where it's like a hard effort, we're being super, super fresh. Gives you so much benefit. And if nobody's ever tried doing a hard effort really fresh, at the end of your next rest week, take, you know, if your rest week, let's say like Friday, you've just been doing, you know, Z1 rides, let's call it Z1, recovery rides all week, or days off. Friday, do a couple short, little accelerations, just open the legs up a little bit. Sunday, or not Sunday, Saturday. Do a one-minute full gas effort. Yeah. I guarantee you're going to surprise yourself. I literally just assigned this to someone. Yeah. Oh, God, I love it. And it's so easy to get a PR out of somebody like that when you first start working with them. And some people are like, how'd you do that? It's like, I didn't do that. You did that. Like, you are finally fresh. Look at that. Look at those legs you got. Exactly. Yeah. So thinking about a one-day race, unless it's something like that where somebody's got to be super fresh, like for a hill climb. I usually will give somebody a bit more training that week. And so kind of like I laid out before, thinking about like those goal races that we did specific prep for, like the two weeks before that final race, the week before, actually, you know, we can go back three or four weeks. He had a race and then he had another race. I gave him a super easy couple days, prep ride, recovery, openers. Got a cold. Go figure, right? Took a couple days off, and those days off seriously salvaged so much, because if he had done those races, I think he would have had worse legs for it. So he actually gets a proper rest after that first big effort. Then it's like, stage race, I would have given him some moderate workouts. So short stage race, day off, recovery ride, team ride, Practice Crit with Endurance, Recovery, Recovery, Bam. So that final week going in is like day off, recovery ride, team ride, very moderate. He put an RPE of two. Day after that is like just a crit and endurance riding. So that was a total of five hours that day. Two hour... Easy Spin the next day, and then we're on Saturday, and he rode three, but he said he wishes he could have rode one, because his legs felt amazing after one, and he was like, I should have gotten in a team car, but we didn't have one. And the next day, he had amazing fitness. So it's more like lowering the medium days to easy, and then keeping the hard days hard. And that final week was only 20 hours, but... Four and a half of them were on the last day. So it was like a pretty much a 15 hour week with like only one proper training day in it, you know, three days out. So it was like he was fresh, but also he was training. You know what I mean? It wasn't like, you know, four easy days and then openers. It was like he was training like on and off through the last couple of weeks. Right. Yeah. One thing I just want to Just touch on, and we've just started to touch on it a bit, but you just kind of remind me of how important this is. It's something I want to remind to everyone, and this is so important. The perfect, without issue prep doesn't, almost never exists. Like, it is so hard to get that. You're going to get sick, a family emergency is going to come up, your bike's going to break, something's going to go wrong, and that is the norm. Like, as you roll into your race season, prepare yourself mentally. There are things that are going to go wrong, things that feel like a huge deal, but that's just going to happen, and that is what's normal. What's abnormal is rolling into a race, perfect everything, no issues, and even then I'd be scared. I'm like, oh, you're going to flat out. You're going to flat out in 20 minutes. You know, like, the bad luck is always there, so just embrace it. and be ready for that. I think that mental toughness is the importance that can't be understated. Yeah, I completely agree. I think that's one of the things that, especially when I do consultations with people, because people don't know if you want to do a consultation, it's like we're going to talk for a while about your specific goals and what you need to do, and we're going to give you specific tools for you to do XYZ. like build your FTP or like get ready for a race or, you know, do better in this race that went poorly last year. You want to do better. You want to optimize or it went well. I've done a lot of those that went well. How do I do better? So, um, and so, um, where was I going with that? I had a thought. All right. So, um, and so, so coaches like us, we see a lot of stuff. And when I consult with somebody, I don't, Tell them, do this, this day, and this, this day, and this, this day. I give you a range of options. I tell you how to adjust. Your legs feel like this. If this happens, maybe try this. But it's more about having a tool for the occasion than having a specific plan laid out. Because, like you said, something always goes wrong. Yeah. Almost always. Almost always. No, I mean, more times than, I don't know. Yeah. And like you said, I mean, earlier, that's why we're here. Why there's not just cookie cutter plans, it's like, some of them are just going to come up, you're going to text us panicking, and then we're going to like, make it all okay, so. We're going to do our best. We're going to do our best, but anyway, getting back to kind of the one day prep, I think you're spot on, and I think I want to echo the, you know, probably not a great idea to have your big race after a whole rest week, and I think. That's just also my observation after coaching. Well, that's one of our questions. Actually, one of the old school ways to do a rest week to quote-unquote taper, I mean, this is from like the 60s and 70s or something like that. It's like, don't even look at your bike. And I know coaches who still assign rest weeks like this. Don't look at your bike at all. Don't touch it. Yeah. Um, and yeah, you get on your bike, you're going to feel really, really fresh, but you also might feel really, really stale at the same time or one or the other, or I would be very, very stale. It would take me a couple of rides to really get back into it or even a week or two. Mm-hmm. Yeah. I mean, I think some people, obviously there's, everyone's different and some people can do stuff like that, but even, yeah, rest week, even with openers, I think sometimes it's not really enough stimulus. keeping the harder days there, you know, leading into a race is, I think, a better strategy. Like, one thing I like, you know, for example, it's like, maybe you had a, you know, a decently hard-ish weekend, Monday, Tuesday, easy, and then maybe Wednesday you're doing like a, you know, maybe kind of a race-specific harder group ride or something like that. Thursday, chill, Friday, maybe like endurance, light opener, something like that, race Saturday. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I actually just went back to look at another kind of taper for somebody going into a stage race, and it was, and actually, it was my first time working with him, and this is a lesson for everybody. It didn't go badly, or it didn't, it also didn't go particularly well. It was like middle of the road. And I'm looking at this, and I'm thinking, you know, he said, I need a little more riding in my legs before they feel good, especially for stuff like this. And so I actually went back to his previous plans heading into other similar races. And I looked at that and I thought, okay, this is probably what went well with this. This is what we can do better. And then planned it all out and the race went okay. It wasn't amazing. It wasn't bad. But the point is that we learned a lot doing this. As you go through tapering for races, well, there's a couple things to think about. First, you don't want to taper that often. Like, if you end up tapering every week or every, like, two weeks for, like, you know, three months, like, your fitness is gone. Like, you have to prioritize some races and they can't all be like, A, A, A, A. Yep, yep. So, that's something to think about. But, so, tapering is a strong... A strong spice. And you don't want to put too much of a strong spice in a recipe, because then everything tastes like garlic powder, you know? Yes. So the point being that you can take your best guess, but like Alex said, you're not going to get it right, most likely, but you're never going to get it right. Tools that you pick up about, how do my legs feel? What kind of workout do I need? Do I need more rest? Do I need to push a little more? Am I getting a little open? Am I not quite open? Every time I talk to Corey leading into a couple races, especially back-to-back kind of weeks, he's... he's like sailing on another plane that like I can't even access in terms of like in terms of I need to push a little bit I need to pull a little bit and like I look at the plan I wrote and I'm like man I got all this wrong but Cory knows what he's doing he's the master of his own legs and so so I trust him implicitly to like get there on race day with great legs because he's got so much experience and he knows exactly what he needs like to the point where I don't And so that's another thing about kind of doing some of this stuff is like, you know, we're taking our best guesses and people who are self-coaching, you're all taking your best guesses. Yeah. But don't be afraid to modify based on information that you have available to yourself. Yep. Especially if you get more experience. So, yeah, it all matters a lot. But that's why we coach. We have a lot more experience, but at some point, there's nothing like being in somebody's legs. Totally. I agree. And I think the one thing I want to add to that is too, is just like, and this comes again from coaching people and really my own experience. It's like, in your mind, you might think, oh, I'm not fit or I don't, my legs are bad or I don't know. Or like, I haven't had enough prep. Don't, you know, I mean, obviously be in touch with like, am I fatigued and burnt out? But I mean, you know, I think. What I've noticed is, like, people often end up having better races than they thought they were going to. Or, like, I've showed up to  I mean, personally, when I went into Redlands, I was like, man, I don't know. My prep was  I don't know about that prep. But, you know, I was just like, well, it's done. It is what it is. And I rolled in, and I had a great race. Like, it was all fine. And I've seen that with lots of my clients. So try not to get too in your head about rolling into a race. and really just trust, hey, I've trained a lot. I've put in so much time that will amount to something. Yeah, and it's rare that somebody's life is so in control outside of your normal variables that you can do exactly the same thing to every single race and have it go exactly as you think. Because in an ideal world, that is a great strategy. If you are a top-level Diamond League sprinter or something like that, You line up for your 200-meter dash or whatever it is, and you know exactly you've done the same prep every single time, and you're just hoping to go that 100th of a second faster this time. And that's what it comes down to. It's a highly controlled thing. But if you're a regular amateur, stuff comes at you crazy fast, and you don't know what to do, and your legs are up, your legs are down. Because what I'm getting to here that you reminded me of, and we're going to... We're going to get to listen to questions after this, because otherwise you and I are going to go back and forth reminding each other stuff for hours. It's that getting somebody's best legs on race day is one of the hardest things to do in all of racing and training and self-coaching, everything. It's genuinely, it's not in your head, it's not in anybody's head who's listening, that is a real thing. Yep. But, one of my standards for coaching is to make sure that somebody is having at least consistently good days. You know, the difference between a good day and a great day is maybe like a couple percent of power output points, like points, watts, a couple watts. You know, it's like your best previously up this climb was like 310 watts and this year you're hoping to do 320. But if you do 310 again, You're still in a good spot. That's great. Yeah. So, it's, what am I trying to say, Alex? Oh, consistency. Consistency. Consistency. Because that's why you had a good race. Because you know how to train. You know how to train yourself. And even if things don't go perfectly well, you at like 85%, 90% is still really good. And as long as... Nothing's going too wrong on the other side of things. You're fine. Exactly. I agree. Okay, I want to add one more thing, too. I know we're still taking questions, but just an overarching thing, because I think some of you can ask, well, when do I taper? Do I, you know, if I'm not tapering for every race, when do I taper? Because, as you said, Coley, like... Yeah, and how many times a year? How many times a year? So, and I think that's an important question, because you're not tapering for every race. Yeah, so I think kind of... And I think this also just ties into the whole subject of race prep. You know, if you're looking at a whole season of racing, it's like, yeah, how am I getting ready for this? What's my approach here? So, you know, I think pretty standard approach of doing like two or three A races, let's say, for your season where you're like, you know, you really want to do well at those races. I would say just kind of rule of thumb, those are your races that you're going to taper for. Yeah. And then we're looking at. You know, maybe B and C races that, you know, maybe we want to do well in, but maybe they're ultimately more serving the goal of getting you ready for those A races. But I think, I really think, and this strategy is not anything new, it gets talked about a lot, I think it is really sound because you can't go into every race being tip-top. Not going to happen. And that's a good way to just be average all the time. We're after peak performance, we're after doing your best, right? And we're after very often doing really well on certain races. So how are we going to build the year? How are we going to prepare so that you are your best on those specific race days? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Listener questions. And before we get to listener questions, I... Well, this is a preamble. It's not a, you reminded me of, you did remind me of several things, but I'm just going to skip them and keep them on another podcast. So we got a lot of questions that we're not going to get to. Like we seriously got like 30 questions and we're probably going to get to like 10 or 12. And one of the reasons is that the questions were too specific. They're too personal. And so this is a good time to think about hiring somebody for coaching, whether it's us or not. Like, it would benefit you if you're having these questions or consult with us. You know, shoot me an email, empiricalcycling at gmail.com. Say, I want to coach or I want to consult with you. Like, it's a paid consult. Don't get me wrong. I'm not going to do it for free. But, you know, we'll spend an hour or two. We're going to sit down. We're going to look at what your training's been up to. I'll look at your files. We'll look at the event. We're going to talk about different ways to approach it. And we're going to talk about all the tools you need, like I said earlier, to kind of to kind of, you know, we'll give you the tools that we've gotten with our experience. Yeah, exactly. And that's, it's so valuable, especially for people who like to coach themselves or, you know, can't afford a coach because, you know, we're not the world's most expensive coaches. We are certainly not dirt cheap either. So consultation is a good way to go for a lot of folks. So let's start with... similarities and differences between a rest week and a taper week. So we kind of got into this earlier, but we kind of didn't. So like, like, because like, you know, typical person doing a lot of stage racing in the US, you know, what is three, three, four days easy into a stage race, like Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, you start something like that. And that's could look like a rest week, but You're not really rested at the end of that. Like, you're fresh, but you've still got a lot of training in your legs. So, to you, what's the difference between rest and taper? Yeah, kind of like you were saying, it's like the taper is getting you to the right balance of, you know, freshness and trained so that you're at just the right moment to race. So, I think taper is, yeah, a lot more. specifically putting you in the right place to do well at your target event. Recovery week, I think its goal is different in that it's really trying to rest you up, get you recovered properly so that you can get into another block of training. Because as we just talked about, a rest week is not a good way to get you ready for a race that weekend. It's a good way to give your body and mind some recovery so that next week, okay, I'm ready to go and keep plugging along here. Yeah, and usually like we, you know, after a rest week, like I want to know how somebody likes doing before we start hitting them again with hard workouts, but heading into a race, typically You know, typically we've seen the race more than like a few days ahead of time. It certainly happens. Somebody springs one on us. Hey, I'm going to go do this thing. It's like, oh, well, I wouldn't have given you today's workout if I had known, but okay, let's try it. Exactly. But we see it coming. The proverbial mile away. And so we've planned for this so that you can get there, you know, if you set it like a B priority or a C priority. C priority, okay, we're just going to train through it, fine. B priority, okay, we'll give you a little bit of freshness, but it's not a true taper. A race, okay, sure. This is a taper, this matters a lot. And so, like, when you're heading into a taper, it's more like you've done all the training and now you're just maintaining. and you're starting to let that freshness come up while maintaining that fitness. That's the way I like to think about it. Totally. And I think, too, this, you know, I think the stakes are a little higher and it's a much more controlled thing, even though it's just like, oh, I'm just doing easy days. It's like, no, this is still really specific training. And also it's like, you know, maybe we're doing a day off or so, but then those other easier days, maybe we're really being choosy and careful of. either, you know, strictly recovery pace for only so long, or we're doing an endurance ride only so long. We're being really careful with the taper, whereas recovery week, I think, can be a bit more open-ended, and that's like, you know, don't push too hard. If you were feeling okay, maybe ride a little more than you, you know, than two hours, it's fine, whatever. You're being a little more loosey about it. Yeah, and especially during a taper, you want to save your good legs. Exactly, yeah, yeah. And in a rest, you're looking for your good legs, because you're exhausted. In a table, you're feeling pretty good, and you're feeling a little better, and then you, you know... and you're kind of like letting your body come up for air more, but you're also, you got to whack it every now and then with a hard workout. Totally. So it's, yeah, they're a little different, but they're also very similar. I would say there's a spectrum of like tapered to rest. Where are we on the tapered to rest spectrum? Like stage races in the middle, in my typical, you know, middle of road scheme. That's also like a short stage race. We talk about a three-week stage race. Oh, God. That's a whole other discussion. So, next question is, does carb loading help with really short events like hill climbs, individual pursuit, etc.? Oh God, carb loading. You know what? Typically, in the literature, shorter events actually do not benefit from carb loading, is the general consensus that seems to be. In my experience, There is some benefit to carb loading if you've got to do it multiple times. If you've got a qualifying kilo in the morning and then a proper race kilo in the evening, then having some extra carbs is going to make a big difference. If you've got to do three rounds of qualifying pursuits or two rounds and then a final or something like that, being carb loaded makes a big difference. But if it's like a one-off hill climb, You know, one to five, eight, something like that, minutes. It doesn't seem to make that big difference, but what makes the biggest difference is actually being super fresh with that kind of stuff. Yeah. So does that mean you shouldn't eat keto the day before your hill climb, Cole? I wouldn't really do keto just ever. That's just me. I don't know. None of the scientific evidence suggests that it's good. Yeah. I do love a steak, so. Yeah, I think, and I think the only thing, other thing I'll add there is like, especially with a hill climb or like something super intense where you're like puke inducing, it's like stick to your normal diet and maybe even, or just don't go too crazy. Like don't have a ginormous meal the night before or even the morning of because that might really inhibit you. Nothing new, exactly. Yeah, yeah. Actually, I have a random question for you. You're a vegan. Are there keto vegans out there? Oh, God. Is that a thing? I believe it is. Yeah, I think it is. A lot of nuts. A lot of nuts. Yeah. The people or the diet? Both. Both. Seriously. Sorry, vegans out there. If you're a keto vegan, I can't imagine we have any keto vegans listening, but no offense, Matt. I was just genuinely curious. Alright, next question is, what is your ideal warm-up for race day? And I actually find that this changes based on how the last couple days have gone into the race. So, you look ponderous, so I'll start, I guess. Sorry, is this day before or day of race? I'm thinking day of. But, you know, like I just mentioned, the couple days beforehand seemed to make a difference to me. Oh, yeah. Or to my clients, rather. I don't race anymore, really. So if somebody's stressed, I want them to do less and less and less. And the less they do and the more they're resting to recover from whatever last hard workout was. Let's say your last hard workout was Tuesday and you've got a race on Sunday. And then you've got a medium workout like Wednesday and then Sunday's the big day. If shit goes off the rails like Thursday, and you are like out of your mind stressed Thursday, Friday, Saturday. I don't want you riding hard at all. Yeah. I want you to rest up, spin easy, check out the course, walk it and then in the morning of, now I want you to get a good warm up in, like a long one. A lot of easy spinning, really, really get yourself sweating, like get ready because, you know, you haven't opened up the last couple of days, especially if you typically need openers. So it changes to me. what your warm-up is, like what's a good warm-up. Actually, I remember, Alex, last time you were on the podcast, I think you were on with Taylor, and we were talking about Crits, and I asked you guys what the warm-up was, and you said you didn't do one. And I think you've had a little change of heart lately on warm-ups. Yeah. Well, yeah. I think the first thing I want to say is personal experience and working with athletes. I've heard so many times and experienced so many times, wow, I wish I warmed up more. Or period. Way more than, oh, I warmed up too much. I mean, sure, that happens sometimes, and I think that's more I rolled into this too fatigued or went too hard the previous day. But I think generally a more thorough warm-up, especially for something like a crit, is always going to be better than I just spun around for five minutes and then went to the start line. Yeah. Um, and so I think great race day warmup, um, you know, rolling around 20, maybe even 30 minutes. Um, longer sometimes for sure. Even yeah. Longer sometimes. Why not? Uh, I mean, I love, uh, I'm going to do an easy one hour spin over to the race and that's great. Um, yeah. With one little jump. With one little jump, just one little activation. Yeah, and personally, I'm a fan of, I'm going to roll at, you know, maybe five to ten minutes of hard tempo to get my heart rate consistently steadily up to maybe just under or around race pace. And I know I have other folks who like something like that as well. So, yeah, and I think especially with higher intensity stuff like crits, cross races, I mean. You really gotta warm up, so maybe you're even going even harder than just one little dig or five to ten minutes at, you know, hard tempo. But I think touching back to earlier, the other podcast, and I think, and this is why there's always never a one-size-fits-all thing, it's like, you know, if you're racing crits, if you're doing intelligentsia, and you're going hard every day, you know, maybe do a chill spin over to the race. You can basically just line up and you're ready to go. Yeah, the context for the warm-up makes a big difference. I remember when I was racing cross a lot, if I had done a double race the day before, I remember the next day, I would just spin easy on the course and then on the way over to the start line, I would do one short jump in my small ring. By short, I mean five seconds and I would spin out. I looked crazy rolling over to the start line. I was doing like 130, 180 RPM, something like that. And that was enough for me as a minimum dose. So that's something I'm always thinking about. What's the minimum? What's the maximum? And there's obviously a range. There's no perfect thing. I think something that actually can contribute also to a poor race day for a lot of folks is getting thrown off the routine. So if you like to do XYZ at exactly these times and like somebody comes up to you, you've got to move your car or something like that, then that can throw shit way off and you've got to be able to roll with those punches. Yeah. Just, you know, keep yourself calm. Even if you're texting Alex, oh my God, my work routine is off. Am I going to be okay? You're going to be fine. Okay. And one thing I want to add to that too is you slept like shit last night. It's fine. You're going to be fine. So did everyone else. Everybody sleeps bad for a race, for sure. Okay, next question is, should I take a rest week before I taper? Probably short answer, no. I'm going to go with no. Yeah, because actually, one of the things about a training and racing all at once. If you need a rest two weeks out before your main race, that means you did it wrong because you've been training too hard. I need a rest, but on the other hand, if previously you have found, okay, I need a rest week and then I just need a couple hard workouts to get my legs back under me and then I have an amazing race, that's totally fine if that's your personal experience. It's just not an experience that we've had very often. So it's one of those fuck around and find out things. It's literally a scientific process. Oh, there's this interesting thing. I should try to do it again and see if it's consistent, blah, blah, blah. Yeah. Yeah. And I can see the kind of thinking there, you know, oh, I want to be fresh and rested for my race. So I've been training hard and I'm going to do recovery week and then I'm going to taper into my race. And that's just going to be too much. Rest. You kind of timed that wrong. Yeah. I mean, and I've had clients, especially with my pros, it's a little easier to do this, do like higher volume stuff and keep the ball rolling for a couple weeks. Like I've had people train as long as like maybe six-ish weeks into a main race and we'll start tapering or even seven weeks and we'll start tapering at week five out of the seven, depending on the kind of race it is, depending on how that person goes. That's a totally viable strategy that sounds unheard of, but you should see the results. I believe it. Actually, I read an interview with, I think it was Sepp Kuz's coach, something like that, where pretty much he was talking about how Sepp just rides a lot all season. and he gets rest after specific events and blah, blah, blah and it doesn't seem to be detrimental and so it's one of those things where like if you feel like something crazy is actually working for you just because on paper somebody says it's wrong doesn't necessarily mean it's wrong especially because everybody's always different schedules are different yada yada especially if you've got a weird work schedule you know if you do like three 12 hour shifts in a row and then you've got four days off or something like that that's You're probably going to have extremely different needs than somebody who does a regular 9-to-5 and has weekends open. Yeah, that's true. And I think, too, the one other thing I want to add, and the Sep Kustin kind of touches on it a bit, but I mean, yeah, if you're, like, heading into a big race and you think, oh, shit, I overdid it, or, you know, yeah, I trained too much, or I think I fucked this up, and you're like, I should take a rest week, or whatever. I think just riding, riding endurance, keeping volume, maybe where it's been, but just kind of taking back the intensity and just riding. I think that's a great kind of like, probably it'll save you a bit, like a good safe bet where, you know, you're not gonna tank yourself and, but again, you just wouldn't want to just go right into a rest week because that'll likely really mess things up. Yeah, for sure. And that was one of the things that I, I kind of had on the back of my mind to touch on and we didn't really get to, but I was actually thinking that I think variables are different in terms of volume and intensity. And so volume is something that for some people goes really well to maintain. For some people, we need to reduce it. and but a lot of the time for just about everybody modulating the intensity like number of hard days a week and not really reducing the intensity but keeping it high this this makes a big difference and especially if you're heading into a like a time trial or something like that you want like specific pacing practice at race pace it can make a huge difference yeah okay next question role of race specific intervals in a long season of frequent training april start to august peak So, I'm going to rephrase this question, because it's a bit of an odd one, but I kind of liked where it was going. So, if you're racing a lot, and actually, we started with this, didn't we? If you're racing a lot, what is the role of hard intervals? So, like, because I want to rephrase this a little bit, and let's think about it slightly differently. What kind of intervals do you not need to do? if you are racing, let's say, every one to two weeks for most of the season. Yeah, exactly. Because I think at that point you're looking at possibly hurting yourself more than benefiting if you're racing all the time. And so I think at that point it's like looking at, kind of like I was saying before, what's holding me back? Because Maybe, you know, you think, oh, I should, I need to be more race fit. I need to do more 30-30s. And it's like, well, maybe actually your repeatability, maybe your FRC is actually quite good. And if you're just, if you do more of that, you're just going to dig yourself more into a hole and actually take away from, you know, how fresh you are rolling into whatever race. Or again, I've been racing two times a week and I haven't done any threshold work in two months. You know, so then it's like, all right. We need to prioritize that. Maybe you're not going to race the next couple weeks or only race one time and we're going to be able to get in two to three workouts instead. Yeah. And sometimes, because I'm typically used to dealing with people whose teams decide their schedule or with amateurs who are somewhat time constrained, but when you get an amateur who goes to every race and has the time and the means to do a lot of racing, that's... That's a weird point for some of us coaches who are used to not having to advise people on a race schedule. Because usually it's like people can't race that much. So it gets weird if somebody's got like 50 race days lined up for their season. And it's like, are you getting paid for this? Do you want to peak anywhere? Do you want to... Yeah, right. Like what's our focus here? Do you want to go 90% all year? Okay, you're going to have to drop these couple races. Do you want to go 100% at these races? Okay, you're going to have to maybe drop a couple more or like... you know, drop into a seat priority or something like that. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I think, I think also, yeah, to answer this question though, I think also longer. Yeah. Yeah. I think it's really not as race specific. If you're racing a lot, it's more what I've seen. We need to get a longer ride in. You haven't been riding over two or three hours and we need to top up your, uh, like threshold. We need to do some threshold or tempo work. Yeah, oh god, the longer ride thing is such a good thought too, because people who are racing a lot, a lot of the races aren't that long. Yeah. Unless you're in the world tour, and so if you're not in the world tour, your races aren't going to be somewhere between like one hour to what, four-ish hours for the most part. Four hours would be a long day for a lot of folks. I don't think I've really seen an amateur race go longer than like four and a half very often. And so it makes a big difference to maintain your aerobic Just endurance in general to skip the occasional race and make sure you get in a long ride, especially if that's something you normally have. Because if you're normally doing two or three hours, race two or three hours, fine, no problem. But if you're used to doing like five, six, seven, eight hours or whatever, I know people are going, oh my God, Cole's dropping all the big numbers again. Like, no, there are immatures who do this. So if that's you and you are missing that aerobic endurance, like you can tell when you're racing. Alex, I'm sure you've experienced this for sure. Totally. Yeah. Okay. Next question is, how long should my race prep take? And so I want to actually think about this in terms of, you know, we're going to, let's think about just a goal race. Because if somebody is just going to be at like 90% and have a bunch of good races through a season, I'm going to start them like six to eight weeks out. But if you've got a couple A races, If your A race is your first race of the year, remember Bat and Kill? It's a lot of people's first race of the year, especially in the Northeast, yeah. And that happened, what, like the first weekend of April or something like that? Something like that. And it was like, I went there as my first race so many times and I had shit legs every single time. I was going to say, choosing your A race as your first race of the year, maybe not the best idea. It's hard. It's really hard to do. It genuinely is, especially if you've just been on the trainer up until that day. Then it's like you're lacking all your pack skills. Like you forgot how to ride up, you know, forgot how to corner, forgot how to do anything. Yeah. Forgot how to eat on the bike. How much do you eat? Oh, God, I didn't pack enough gels. Like that sure happens. Yeah. So like typically race specific prep, if you are doing like specific training, like, you know, for that race I talked about, like 13 times up this minute and a half hill, or pacing a specific TT. If you're doing that, I usually want to see it start anywhere from four to six weeks out. Because that's usually enough time you can sneak in a couple of those rides, like two to four, something like that. But for general race prep, if you just start racing early, and they're all low-priority races. I'm going to have you do race prep efforts from maybe like two to three weeks out and maybe we'll do some moderate stuff before that but like we're not going to really focus on it too much because I don't want you going ham from like January to March and then you've got to go from March to October and race. Like that's way too long to maintain that intensity. And there's just only so many months in the year. You know, because we also are looking at getting in aerobic work or VO2 max stuff and recovering from that and other things. So it's like, there's only so much time. So I think, yeah, if you're looking at racing earlier in the year, I think best strategy is using those early season races as kind of a bunch of your race prep. Yeah, but I would agree that like maybe four to six weeks out, like, you know, let's say, oh, I'm not racing until, I'm not racing until May or something like that. You know, I think, yeah, looking at maybe mid-March, you know, we're going to start doing the harder group rides and more race-specific work, and that way by May, you'll have had that intensity, you'll have that specific training, and yeah, you'll be at a good place for your races. Yeah. All right, next question is... Where'd it go? Oh, here it is. Seemed to always race better with some fatigue in the legs. Is this a real thing? And if so, how to alter taper. So, is this a real thing? Cole, is it a real thing? Because, okay, so is it really, when we're saying fatigue, you know, is it actually fatigue? Or is it something else? That's a good question, because I think, because, man, this is a You know, at first I thought this was going to be an easy answer. Now you bring it up that way. This is a minefield. This is a, yeah, let's, all right, let's, let's try not to get too far into Wonderland with this answer. So, yes, it's a real thing that, let's just say having some work in the legs is more beneficial for some people. That is definitely real. Kind of like we alluded to with like, should I rest before I taper or something like that? Like, you can definitely do that. Like, you can take a rest week and then have a training week into your, you know, quote, quote, quote, training week, you know, specifically for whatever, into your race. And sometimes that works for people, for sure. A lot of the time when I've gotten clients who say that they do better with more in their legs, usually what's happening is they actually have been overtrained previously. And so this is why it's kind of a rabbit hole, because if you've been overtrained, what happens is you take a rest week and your body is, at the end of the rest week, just starting to go, oh, God, that's better. Yeah, it stopped. Okay, I'm going to let you know how much fatigue you are really, really, like, how much you've really accumulated. And then that first week, you start training, your legs go, Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. And then you keep hammering it with intervals, and then all that stress starts to come back up, and then your body, after a week, starts to go, okay, all right, no, we can do this, it's fine, it's fine. And then in week three, now you're screaming for your rest week again. because you're starting to fall off the pace and week three sucks. I've seen that happen so many times. Yeah, you're bringing back old memories of mine, personal memories. I'm so sorry. So yeah, that's potentially a thing too and I think when Megan was on the podcast, we talked about that, how she was somebody who said something like that to me and I've had several other clients who have done the same and that's almost universal. Yeah, I mean, and that's, you know, maybe the correct term is fatigue, but to me it feels like something else than that. Yeah, I have a client I'm thinking of who second day of racing, almost always better than the first day. Even if we do decent openers the day before of a race weekend, second day is almost always better. But I think that kind of brings up a good point here in that it's like, When I think of fatigue, I'm thinking of actually being really tired and not able to perform at your best. Rather than work in the legs. Exactly, work in the legs. Yeah, my middle term. There's plenty of people, myself included, who it's like, I'm feeling great at day four of a stage race. And to me, that means, I mean, that points to, I think, abilities in your physiology, but I think that points to you've had the proper amount of rest and tapering. Going into your race so that by day four you are still feeling good, you are still able to perform well, and whatever it is about you and your training that you've done, you know, you're able to still go well, if not better, by that fourth day or whatever. Yeah, I think that that's actually, that's also an individual thing too, where like, Katie is like that, where she goes, Her best day is always the last day of a stage race, and she gets more fit through it, even though the fatigue is mounting too. And that's a normal thing, and I've got a couple clients like that, but also at the same time, there are definitely people who don't go better through the stage race, even if they're eating right and they're sleeping right and everything's going well, where it's just fatigue accumulating, and that's okay. I have some theories on the underlying physiological mechanism of that, but we don't really have to dig too deep into it. But it does seem to be a thing that's something you learn about yourself and something where you've got to not assume you are always going to be like that also. Because some of my best races I ever had when I was road racing was like, I would do like a hard set of intervals like Tuesday, my coach gave me. And then I would like rest like Wednesday, Thursday, then Friday would be openers. And then if I had like a Saturday, Sunday thing, my Saturday was always meh. And then Sunday was always good. But the one time I had an amazing, like I remember my legs being perfect for this day. I did pretty much a rest week. because I had, I had, it was, it was like Fitchburg Longshow, but they didn't have a Saturday. So it was like Friday and then Sunday crits. And Friday sucked. I got dropped immediately because I had openers Thursday and I was like, I was just dog shit. And then I did a two hour endurance ride on Saturday and then Sunday my legs were phenomenal. Like, I actually, you know I'm a sprinter, but like, I felt good enough, I tried to break away in that race at like eight laps to go or something like that. I was like, I can get this, I got it this time. That's how good my legs felt. I deluded myself. So, I mean, yeah. I think, and this is kind of a thought forming, but I mean, I wonder if it's also like, oh, it's Sunday, no more racing after this, so I'm just gonna. I can go as hard as I can or I want. And then maybe it's like if you're racing Saturday, you're like, well, I got to race another day. So somewhere in the back of my brain is like, I'm not going to, you know, I can't go so hard. You got the rev limiter on or something. Yeah. Something like that. I don't know. It's just, yeah. I, I, I, that's definitely not the case with me. Uh, but I can, I can easily see it being the case with some folks for sure. Yeah. Um, anyway, so we've dug into this enough. Why don't we get to the next one? Should you stop strength training in a taper week? Hmm. Yes. Should you stop? Probably? Well, I guess it depends on the event. I mean, right? Strength work could be just what you want. Well, even in track, like just for pure sprinters, like the strength stuff really tapers off to like a very, very low amount. like even like a week out of an event or more, sometimes a week and a half. And by that point, you're just like up to a handful of singles or something like that, like a little explosive work. It's all like race-specific, track-specific stuff at that point. And that's with like strength being a major component. At that point, it's like for activation. It's not like you're going to gain more strength or muscle mass like three weeks out from an event. Like what? Like lifting another like, you know, two pounds on your squat is going to make a difference? Like it's not. It's really not. Like you can put the change plates away. You don't need those, you know, one kilo plates on there. Two weeks out from my A-race, I got to get more squats in. No, you don't. Yeah, don't do that. Especially for road stuff, for endurance stuff. Usually at this point, I have... tapered off the strength training for most people where if they really need it, their last strength training day has been a very light day, probably two weeks out for something like that. It should have been gone at that point, in my opinion, unless you need it for PT, for upper body stuff, for activation kind of things, especially if you're doing planks or push-ups or rows or whatever helps you feel stable in the bike. That kind of stuff's fine. It's not going to hurt you. The heavy stuff, everybody wants to maintain that strength, but you don't need it. You need to let yourself recover because the recovery from the heavy strength training takes so much time. I do it all the time. Ask me how I know. So, yeah, get rid of the strength training in your saber week, or if not sooner. Okay, just a couple left. How does tapering scale with total training volume? Does a 10 hours a week master need less tapering? Okay, so let's think about this in two ways, because you and I both work with low volume people and masters as well. So low volume, if you're doing 10 hours a week, how much are you really tapering the volume? Because a lot of the literature... looks at tapering volume, intensity, both, one, the other, yada, yada. Pretty much, if you're on eight hours a week, I feel like I'm going to think about the intensity in the same way in terms of the hard days and the easy days, but maybe we'll drop it a couple hours, but I'm going to turn your two-hour endurance ride, maybe you've got it on one day, I'm going to turn that into a one-hour recovery ride or a day off. That's really one of the biggest changes I would make for a taper, so it's really not going to be that drastic a change, I would say. Yeah. Yeah, I would agree. I think it's like, with someone who's not training or racing as much, or they're just like, I mean, I'm thinking of one athlete I have who's like, you know, if we're able to hit every workout during the week, that's like a huge victory, you know? So... You know, so I think like a taper is almost like in some ways kind of like a luxury. It means I've been able to nail all of my training all of the time and I'm, you know, I'm perfectly, you know, my fitness is where it more or less should be. So I think like for someone who has maybe less consistency or is in training as much, I think kind of that like big taper becomes less necessary. And yeah. Yeah, and how about for masters? Especially like kind of low mid-volume masters, like, you know, 8 to, let's say, 12 to even 15 hours a week. Because let's think about what's happening as we're getting older slash I'm getting older. So let's think about what's happening. Let's make this all about me. So as we get older, the recovery rate slows. And nobody really knows why this happens, but we slow down. To me, I'm thinking about, like, my primary thing is, like, how often can I get somebody to go super, super hard and then recover to, like, and go super hard again? Like, that's the first thing I want to think about. If it's, like, four, five, six, seven, eight days, that's something I want to know where, like, how long do we need to really freshen up? And in between that, we're going to let you keep your writing, but you're going to write easy and do maybe... Middle Intensity, like who knows, like that's kind of individual. So, um, yeah, so that's, that's where I first go with master stuff. Yeah, I mean, I think it's something similar and that's like, we're probably looking at maybe longer recovery time. And, and again, going back to the same person who's got a pretty demanding life, it's like, you know, he, he can't really race every weekend. That's just too much stress and he'll probably. Roll up to those races not feeling good. So it's like, if we're racing one weekend, we're probably not going to race the following weekend because he needs, he just needs more recovery. Yeah, that's smart. Yeah, so, so for a master's doing 10 hours a week, a combination of those two things, probably to, it's weird too, because also, because I'm sure you've had clients start up with you where They're like, I've got my main event in three weeks, but I've been sick for two weeks and I'm just getting back on the bike. Help. So like the triage training, you know, I want to get this person as fit as possible, but it's like, but you're right, it tapers a luxury because if you've been training for three weeks because you've been out for two weeks with, you know, the flu or something, you know, you're probably going to want to do more training into your event because you're going to be more fit for it. And that taper is going to be a luxury and it's going to be like, You know, let's keep you riding, but let's freshen you up, but let's drop the expectations too, because this is not going to be a marquee day for you, most likely. Yep, exactly. Alright, two left. How to handle peak events around five weeks apart? Because I think, so like two A-races five weeks apart, I think this is... A good question, the reason I wanted to include it, is because to me, it's a weird duration. How long do you normally have somebody able to hold a peak? I'm going to say probably two to three weeks is pretty normal, but let's say four weeks is starting to be on the outside, and five weeks is really getting dicey to really have that good, good, good form. Yeah, kind of my first thought as well, we're probably almost... got almost treated as like too many peaks and that we're going to peak for our first race, back it off a bit, get some like good recovery in and then build back up for the second one. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, that's, oh God, who did this? I forgot the coach's name. It was, somebody's going to DM me about this. Not, not Sastra. So, shit. So, it was some coach from the like 90s and aughts or whatever. I think he's passed on now. His conception of periodization was actually doing very small chunks of like base build peak, base build peak, base build peak throughout the season. So you would end up doing like five or something like that through a season leading up to like a goal race, like a Tour de France. And so that's the kind of thing I start to think about when I've got these weird little chunks. And that's exactly what you just said. Like, so we're going to take you. Give you a rest and start to build you back up, and then we're going to have like mini peaks. Because that first one, you've got a long run in, presumably. But that second one, like, okay, let's give you a rest, but you can't take too much. We've got to keep you riding, and then we've got to make sure that you're not overdoing it. It's really like a high wire kind of thing. Yeah, I was going to say a bouncing act there. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, it's tough. Anything else to add? Did I drag your memory on that stuff? I mean, I think it is a weird, I'm curious what this person's specific thing is. Yeah, I did not specify. I mean, in some ways, I think it's kind of like some of the calendars that some of my writers have and that they're probably doing like one big event a month. And in some ways that is a bit more challenging. So it's like, we're not looking at like a chunk of our, you know, two or three weekends of our kind of priority racing. You know, it's like one big race a month is a little bit, it's different from that. So I think, yeah, what you're saying is like, we're kind of building up to our maybe race season and then we're doing these kind of, yeah, mini cycles of prep, recovery, you know, train more. and then going back into our race time. Yeah. Occasionally, I'll have the conversation where, especially when I get started with somebody, I'll say, if you're going to race a lot, we can keep you at like 90% throughout the year or we can get you to a couple of really, really sharp peaks. And so most people actually say that they want to be at 90% and race more often in my experience. Yeah. Because, I mean, that's totally reasonable. It's up to them. So that's fine. Totally. All right. Last question is, example prep sessions for a 20-minute TT and how far out from the A-race? Well, we kind of mentioned the, you know, probably six weeks, six-ish weeks out, but I would say occasionally, if you really suck at 20-minute pacing, we're going to go further back than that. Like, we can use 20, we can have you just do a 20-minute test, like, whenever you're fresh enough to really whack it, so. Exactly. I mean, I think that's something, yeah, even to start. I mean, I guess you want to be careful about it, but even something like, I mean, 20 minutes hard, personally, I think it's, I mean, I know it's a somewhat common duration, but I mean, I think if you look at people's power curbs or kind of max efforts that they've done, it's like, sure, people might do a 20 or a 5 or like, maybe, you know, ideally an FTP, like, test effort, 40 to 60 or 70 minutes, but often we're not looking at like, oh, I got to do a 26 minute Max Effort, you know, that's not a super common thing that people do. So I think starting to practice, you know, your sort of odd time max effort, yes, as far as possible to start getting used to that sort of pacing. I think, yeah, if you can recover from it, you know, do it, do it more often. Yeah. So here's an example prep session I would do is I would do two, I would start with like two or three by 10-minute efforts. Thinking, I gotta hold this for 20 minutes. Because if you blow up at 10, you done fucked up right away, but it's good that you didn't fuck that up on race day. And then die 10 minutes in and go, oh god, I hit the turnaround and my legs are toast. That is the worst day you could have. It's one of them. So I would start with that, and then I would bring it out to 15 minutes, maybe 2x15 at race pace. And then, you know, obviously you could do, you know, other training before or after that kind of stuff, or you can break it up however you see fit. But then I'm going to, because a lot of the time I want to be cautious about actually giving somebody like a full gas, like true dress rehearsal, especially in the last couple of weeks before a TT, because you don't want them to use their best effort and then have to recover from it when they should be training. I know. I was going to say, I think that's kind of a delicate thing to do. And if anything, I would say more like, I think ideally, let's say if you have a TT, 20 minute, more of your dress rehearsal is getting out on that course and really practicing key parts of it so that you're really ready for it, rather than just saying, I need to just go for 20 minutes as hard as I can. Yeah. Yeah. Course recon matters a lot. What are the winds like? What's the temperature going to be like? Are there any hills? Out and back, like the Redlands TT is a weird one. It's like out downhill and back uphill. Oh, yeah. That's Redlands, right? Yeah, I think so. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, so like that's a weird pacing. And so it may not just be that you need like an even 20-minute split. I mean, that's fine. But, you know, once you kind of really get into the world of time trial and you're playing 4D chess, you know, you want to make sure that you take into account every little thing. And I've talked to, Cory's been on the podcast twice talking about TT stuff. So the last one he was on, you know, I think I titled it something like, you know, TT Prep or whatever the title was. So go listen to that one for sure. Yeah, and I was going to say too, you know, maybe it's a 20 minute TT effort, but that might not necessarily look like a 20 minute flat all out effort. It might be, you know, I'm riding slightly under and then like going harder for this second half or a section of it because there's going to be a hill and I need to, that's where I need to spend most of my energy. Yeah, yeah. And especially in the UK, a lot of those TTs that I've seen in like local stage races, none of them are flat. none of them are steady it's rolling the whole way like how could you possibly like if that's your A race like okay but otherwise you know how much prep realistically do you want to do out from like a B or a C priority race you probably want to try it once be like okay I got this or do even just roll it easy like put on a simulator and yeah Practice Pacing a little bit, like little sections at a time. There's a thousand ways you can do it, for sure. But a bunch of people asked about a 20-minute TT specifically, so there must be a thing. I bet it's like a UK thing. None of my people in the UK do those time trial series, really, so I'm only tangentially aware. So anyway, so that's the end of our listener questions. Alex, do you have any thoughts to wrap us up here? Oh, I just had one. Oh, I saw you looking for it off camera. I was like, oh, it's over there. Yeah. I think, kind of like I said before, I think like, and we were just touching on this, it's like, there's many things that go into doing well a race. And I mean, I think we talked, you know, a good amount about the training aspects and stuff, and then some of it, the non-training stuff, but... In some ways, I think the training stuff can be almost easier, or it's more the like, oh, I'm in a race, so I'm going to do all this training. But it's like, if you're really trying to do well, I really can't stress enough, you know, research your courses, research what you have to be able to do on them, work on your pack handling skills, work on your bike handling skills, work on all these other things, they're also really important. And then I think the other thing is just like, really try to be as intentional. about your race season as you possibly can. I mean, maybe it's just you're just trying to race more, so you're just going to do whatever races you can, but I think really as much as possible, figure out what races you'd like to do better in or do well in and, you know, prioritize your races, make a plan, and I think you'll just have a more successful and also a more fun and fulfilling race season. Yeah, and especially for people who Don't race that often, or you're newer to racing, and I'm sure this is going to be a lot of our listeners out there, so if you're newer, race experience, for all the reasons Alex has already so astutely outlined today, it's a big deal, and it's more than just about FTP, or what can you do for a minute, or what can you do for a sprint, there's so many more things that go into racing, so sometimes you do want to sacrifice a little more training to do more racing, because that's going to make you faster in the long run. and Alex and I like we've got friends back from the Northeast who really should have raced a little more intentionally and they could have gotten a lot further in cycling but they kind of they kind of topped out because you know you watch them in some of these races and they're just eating wind for like four or five hours at a time and it's like yeah of course you're not doing any better you're not getting results of course you're only 25th in that stage like you could have won it but you spent so much extra energy and no amount of training is going to make that better Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. All right. Cool, man. Thanks for coming on. Sick. Thanks for having me, Cole. All right. Thanks, everybody, for tuning into the episode. And thank you for bearing with the audio issues. We're so sorry that that happened. We'll get it sorted eventually. It does happen now and then. So my apologies one more time, but I hope that didn't interrupt the fact that this was a really cool episode to listen to. And I also hope that didn't interrupt the fact that Alex is a great coach. And if you are interested in working with him or any of our coaches, please email me at empiricalcycling at gmail.com. If you're looking for something for next year, you're looking for a... Spring or Summer Buildup, we can definitely help you get started. This is a really good time to do that. And if you are just looking to coach yourself, you want a consultation, you're wondering what to do better or what went wrong last time, we're super happy to do any of that. So again, email me empiricalcycling at gmail.com. And if you are a student or a pro or extenuating circumstances, our rates can be easily negotiable. So let me know about that and feel free to reach out and just get a conversation started. And thanks again for listening. We are so happy to have you coming back. And again, if you want to share the podcast, Store, leave a donation. We really appreciate that. So, yeah, we'll catch you all next time. 