Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Cole Moore, joined as always by my co-host, Kyle Helson. Thanks, everybody, for listening. Of course, subscribe to the podcast. That would be great. And five-star iTunes rating is awesome. We've loved some of the reviews that we've gotten lately, too. So a nice review always goes a long way. Thank you so much for those. Share the podcast if you like what we're doing here, and also remember especially that we are ad-free. And if you want to donate to the podcast, because that is how we keep going, among other things, you can do so at empiricalcycling.com slash donate. A couple bucks really goes a long way. We've got the show notes up on the website at empiricalcycling.com. We may have a link or two for today's episode. And of course, the last way to support the podcast is to actually become an empirical cycling athlete or sign up for a consultation with us. We will look at your training. So you can do so by reaching out to empiricalcycling at gmail.com. And of course, as always, the Instagram AMAs on the weekends at empiricalcycling. So give me a follow over there and read along or ask a couple of questions. And let's see, what else? So actually today's episode is going to be a kind of companion piece to a WKO 5 webinar that I did last week. Was it last week or the week before? Anyway, there will be a link to it up on the website. And the webinar was about balancing aerobic and anaerobic training. And so we'll go over that very briefly. And you don't have to use WKO 5 to kind of get something out of it, I think. Even though if you do, it would be more helpful because when you explain what to do with WKO5, you kind of have to explain some philosophy behind your thought process first. So that's what I did. And part of that actually stuck in my head. And I did a consultation this week, too, with a high-level cyclist. I won't say who, but I'm sure that this person's listening. Yes, you were inspirational for this episode. And so in that webinar, I talked a bit about teaching to the test and the metric, among other things that I think are mistakes, but I didn't expound on them really. So I think this is going to be a really good place to expound on that. So Kyle, in science in general, I think a lot of people think about measuring things as kind of the be-all and end-all to making something applicable. So what's the kind of story behind all this? So what I think might be a big disconnect here is that if you are working in a lab, you're a research professional, most of the time you are not focusing on developing athletes. You're focusing on doing some study and looking to see if some chosen metric like watts or VO2 max or something like that goes up or down based on some intervention that you do, right? So your goal is somewhat different than if you are coaching someone who's trying to win a bike race, for example. But I think that especially with the availability these days of science and of using cutting edge research in coaching. It's fairly easy to miss that disconnect and just assume that because some metric is getting better, you're going to be able to win more bike races or. Some metric, this XYZ metric is improving. So that must mean that you're getting better, right? Or you're getting fitter or your training is correct. When that may not be the case, even though this formula or this calculation says that, you know, this metric is improving. And I think that's one of the things like when you go to set up a study or when you go to design some sort of experiment. Early on, you've got to identify that metric that you want to use as your tool for comparison and say whether or not good, bad, in between. You have to understand the flaws of this metric or the potential biases or things like that associated with it or understand where this metric is and isn't applicable. So you can imagine if I told you, I want you to measure the distance from from Washington, D.C. to Boston, and I gave you a one-foot-long ruler, you tell me to fuck off, right? That's the wrong metric. That's the wrong tool. How many feet? I don't know. That's not a useful metric. But if I told you to measure the size of, I don't know, the desk that you're working at, oh, a one-foot-long ruler, that's a perfectly fine way to do it. And so part of that is understanding the limitations of the tool or the metric that you're given or that you've chosen. Yeah, that's actually a really good analogy. I mean, you are a physics PhD, so you would have an analogy like that because you do use rulers and measurement devices like that all the time. And so in cycling, I think one of the good analogies that we have here is actually the shorthand FTP tests. So like the 20-minute test or a RAM test or something like that. This is where teaching to the test can do us wrong because once we get over threshold, we have anaerobic contribution too, right? And so let's say you are somebody who's pretty well aerobically trained and you do a 20-minute test and you get, let's say, 250 watts. Cool. If you do nothing but aerobic type maintenance and anaerobic power type training for the next 10 weeks, and then you test again, I bet your test value goes up to 260 or 265, maybe even 270. But did your aerobic power go up? Chances are no. especially if you're not aerobically really training yourself and this is one of the things where that's a measurement tool that has a drawback. Now if you do a 20-minute test and you do a lot of aerobic training and you do almost no anaerobic training or a bare minimum of training that would impact your anaerobic systems and your 20-minute test goes up 10 or 15 watts Chances are most of that is aerobic. And so this is a drawback of the tool that makes a 20-minute test vulnerable to this kind of mistake where you are training to the test rather than training for actual performance. And this is something that I harped on just a tiny bit in the webinar because it was, you know, I was looking at aerobic and anaerobic balance. in WK05 or even like a critical power model, let's say. Let's use critical power and WK05 terminology both. So if your critical power or your FTP, let's say, let's pretend they're equivalent. If your critical power goes up by a few watts, what happens to your W prime, assuming that you've got the same P max and the same power from, let's say, 10 seconds to like a minute, minute and a half or so? So what would you expect to happen there? I would expect it to go down, right? The model has some, if you look at a CP model or a plot of the power curve, right? It tries to calculate your W prime by the amount of area. at the way left-hand side of your power curve for all that area that's above your FTP or your critical power. So if that minimum floor of your FTP goes up, that decreases the total amount of area that you get under the left-hand side of the curve that's above that line. Right. And so it's basically like the total power curve is like the critical, like what's under the critical power line plus what's above it. So it's a very basic addition problem. Critical power plus W prime equals total, right? And so if the critical power goes up, the total will go up based on, you know, whatever the critical power goes up by, but the W prime goes down. And so that's something that we measure it with these kinds of tools. And the same happens in WKO 5. And in the webinar I linked to, I blow up a version of where somebody was training. He's at... 330 watts. His FTP, his FRC, I think was 17.5 kilojoules, something like that. And through aerobic training, his FTP gets up to 350 watts. He goes to sea level, he gets an immediate 20 watt bump. So the metric shows him gaining 40 watts or a little more. It was basically 40 watts in the span of a few months. The FRC goes from 17.5 kilojoules to like 13 kilojoules. And one of the things I show in the webinar is that if we look at his power from peak all the way out to like a minute and a half, it's basically identical. So even though we're using FRC as a stand-in for anaerobic power, as Tim always says, the reality is it didn't drop. He's got the same anaerobic power, it's just that the metric... looks like it's dropping. So does that kind of make sense? Yeah. I would also say that with that, it's not like you have, like in that transition going down from altitude to sea level, you would naturally expect that aerobic values would just skyrocket, right? Yeah. Like you would hope, unless this person somehow has some sort of- Ischemic heart disease or whatever. Yeah, weird disease. But I think that that brings up a good point. Like the metric is a like just like all metrics. You can say, oh, it's our goal is to get all of these numbers to go up. Right. And maybe that's a strategy that you can have. But with certain metrics like that, you also kind of have to understand when they when and why they can go down and why that may not be. I guess a really naive way is thinking, oh, I just want to make all of the numbers better, regardless of what they are, just for the sake of bigness or something, right? And this is a really, I don't want to say naive, but it's a potentially short-sighted strategy of, I just want to get everything better because Yeah, like you said, that may not actually be viable for performance, or numbers may go up and down when in fact they don't actually change in reality. Yeah, and that's one of the interesting things about using models like this. It's that old saying, all models are wrong, but some are useful. That very much applies here, is that we need to understand the... the what kind of balance the model shows us right like like if you are let's say a Criterium racer or a mountain bike racer or something like that and you're like oh everybody else around me has it to be a prime or a FRC of like 28 kilojoules and mine is only like 18 I need to improve this and let but if you have an FTP that's like 80 watts more than everybody else's like that's not so bad Yeah, who cares? It's really not so bad. You would have to compare what's your one-minute power, what's your 30-second, what's your 10-second power. You want to compare more apples to apples because once we get into a model that kind of looks at aerobic and anaerobic contribution, I mean, this is basically what's happening. The model says, or the model thinks that the aerobic contribution is going up. So the integral that shows the anaerobic contribution is going down. And this typically happens, the trade-off balance point is about a minute and a half where we start getting a lot more aerobic contribution. And so if you increase your FTP up a lot, there's a lot of kilojoules to be spent between a minute and a half and where you find you know either the critical power asymptote or your FTP there's a ton of kill jewels there and that's one of the things that happens in the model and actually it's funny you say you know making all the numbers bigger at the same time because in the webinar I have an example of somebody who started training with me in March and he had to be in shape in June I think for Toad and We kind of had to go, all right, how do we get everything to go up at the same time? Yeah. Because, you know, you need a lot of aerobic power, and you need a lot of anaerobic power, because it's a, you know, it's a, what, 10, 11-day stage race for criteriums. You're smashing yourself to bits every day, and if you don't have good aerobic power, then you're going to, your gas tank is going to just drop. Yeah, about a weekend. Yeah. Yeah, and so, you know, it's funny, because... I was at a Christmas party that year after Toad and somebody was like, oh, you coached that guy? Oh my God. He was toying with us like a cat. And I was like, yeah, I know. He's really strong. And it was actually kind of miraculous. And actually just because he's an amazing rider, like just kind of a freak of nature in the best kind of way, we didn't really do that much proper anaerobic training. But his anaerobic power went up anyway. And so the point of all this is that when his FTP was going up from like 330 to like 360 or something like that, his FRC kept going up too instead of dropping. And so why did this happen? It's because his Pmax was going up. And so sometime around March, April, his Pmax was like 1,500 watts. And he kept steadily gaining anaerobic power driven by the increase in Pmax because Pmax is the maximal rate at which you can empty your anaerobic reserves, right? That kind of makes sense. And we talked about that. Sorry. Oh, yeah. Go ahead. Sorry. And we've mentioned that in the... episode about VLA max. Like the thing that ultimately caps your VLA max is going to be how much like maximal power you can produce because if you're going to churn through some incredibly high flux of fuel, like that's going to be the number. Yeah. And, you know, it's funny because VLA max has a very, very similar mode of operation to the critical power W prime model. And so basically what happens is, you know, it's very similar. VLA max, like W prime, is, well, let's say VLA max is like the maximal rate at which you can create lactate, right? So it is actually more like a P max driven metric. And in testing, that's exactly what I found is more P max is more VLA max. And this gets modified. by your aerobic power, right? And so let's say we've got two sprinters with a 300-watt FTP, and one has a 1,000-watt sprint. Okay, so maybe not quite a sprinter, but same body weight, same everything. So we've got somebody 300-watt FTP, 1,000-watt sprint, and another rider, 300-watt FTP, and a 1,500-watt sprint. The rate at which the 1500 watt rider will create lactate is going to be about one and a half times faster. And so... That makes sense. Yeah, so with a 300 watt FTP, which is kind of a standard for aerobic power, but it's actually more complicated than that when we get into lactate utilization and disappearance and stuff, which we're actually going to talk about in the next Wattstock episode, which I'm about half done with. And so if you're looking for a high VLA max, this is actually a lot like having a high FRC. We need to understand the trade-offs in the metric. And so when you teach to the test, like if... Let's say you think FRC or W Prime is going to be the main driver of performance for your criterium racing or your cyclocross racing or your mountain bike racing. If you think that's what's going to happen, if you raise your FTP, FRC is going to go down like W Prime is going to go down like VLA Max is going to go down. Did you lose any anaerobic power in this? No, you didn't. Does that make sense? Yeah. And I think that's a good point. You might freak out, right? You're staring at WKO5 or, I don't know, Golden Cheater or one of these programs and you see, yeah, you're all pumped because you got this brand new FTP number or something like that, right? And you crunch the data, you click refresh on the power duration curve and you see, oh, this number went down and maybe it's red and maybe it's got a minus sign or something so you feel bad. Yeah. I feel like it's a little bit nerve-wracking, though, when you see that, like, oh, this thing went down. Isn't that bad? Why isn't that bad? That's part of the aerobic-anaerobic balance that I talked about in the webinars, because I think, or based on my consultations, and especially my understanding of these metrics early on, It seems like a lot of people will teach to the metric more than actual performance, right? So if you want to have good sprint performance, does that preclude you from having good aerobic power? And if you look at, you know, Woot and Vanderpoel, the answer is, you know, in Saganvin is prime, like you can have both because one physiologically, like a high Pmax requires certain things, right? requires a lot of muscle mass, requires a lot of training. Good neural drive. Yeah. And so if you look at somebody with kind of skinny legs relative to you and me, and they can also, like, let's pick somebody who can do like, you know, 2,000 watts who's kind of slim, like Justin Williams. Well, like 1,900 some odd watts, right? And I can, on an average day, do about 2,000 watts. Good days, well above that, but... Average day, like 1900, 2000, especially if I'm not training like right now. The difference in muscle mass between us is huge, right, in our thighs. So if we look at how that affects aerobic power... It can affect aerobic power by like, you know, more muscle fibers and less capillary density is what I have. And he's got, you know, smaller muscle fibers, smaller muscles and more capillary density. So aerobically, that's going to help him. But he's got greater rate of force development than I do by a lot. And I need to pack on muscle mass to make the same kind of power. And so this is one of those tradeoffs that happens in the very long term that we that we can think about year to year to year. But in the short term. It's more about training focus. Like if you lift weights two or three times a week and you sprint all the time, your aerobic power is just going to drop just because you're not training it. Right. And I think that's interesting. Oh, yeah, go ahead. Sorry. Because that's kind of like the whole point of periodization for a lot of people is that you accept that something is going to get maybe worse. At best, it will... get no better while you focus on making something else better. Instead of trying to just brute force all the things all the time, then you burn out and die. Yeah. And you're touching on something else that I touched on in the webinar, which is that you need a good set of priorities for your training focus. And in the periodization of the year, you think about what are my priorities when. So if it's like January right now and people are starting to move into more aerobic training for like a June-July type peak and you can't get into the gym two or three times a week while you're also trying to do aerobic training like sweet spot FTP, long rides three times a week, maybe four, two, you're burning the candle at both ends energetically and nobody can eat enough or sleep enough or recover fast enough to make all of that work. Having a good plan going in and knowing kind of how to modify it based on your priorities is going to be a key component of success in balancing aerobic and anaerobic focus. You know, not just like the metrics, but what actually drives performance. Because I was talking with a friend of mine, also a listener of the show. How's it going? You'll recognize this conversation when I mention it. How, you know, just kind of knowing the science and the physiology behind stuff is often not enough because we also need to look at athletes from the top level down of like, what workouts are we giving somebody and what is coming out the other side? And I wish it were more often, but it's really not often at all that we can take what we know on a very small molecular level and connect it directly. to a performance adaptation. That's rare. It's a special moment when you find something like that. You know what I mean? Yeah, for sure. And I think that's actually a good point. It requires a deeper understanding of the metric, or at least understanding both the metric and applications of the metric, like correct applications or the shortcomings of the metric. Like, for example, people love to use BMI. on individuals. And oh, you go to the doctor's office, you see the chart like, oh, I'm like obese on the BMI chart. But then later, if you look up any information about BMI as a metric and how it was developed, it was never intended to diagnose individual persons with disease. So it's a complete misapplication. And in order for you to actually use BMI if you do public health or things like that properly, you would have to understand The goal of this metric and it is not to tell individual people to eat less or whatever. Yeah. And I think that requires that little bit extra beyond just finding a paper or finding a new... service or someone who's promoting this new thing. Oh, this new thing, we'll be able to measure performance because we come out with these numbers. And if these numbers go up, that's good because bigger is better. Yeah. Well, it's like one of the very first, you know, I'm not going to mention that, but you know who I mean. I went to a talk from the VLA Max folks way back in, it was early 2018, I think it was. And that was a big selling point, actually, is We can tell you like if the example was somebody does a five-minute test, right? And then you do some training and they do another five-minute test and the power is the same. And he's like, well, did they get better? Who knows? Was it more aerobic contribution? Was it more anaerobic contribution? Then they show a graph that shows like this one was 80% aerobic contribution versus the first one was like 60% aerobic contribution. Aerobically, this person got better. Yay, that's what we want. and we can show this to you and they had a thing to sell and that's cool. It doesn't quite work like that but it's cool. It was like – Well, I was thinking – one thing about that is that theoretically if you are coaching someone and they do a five-minute test and then they do a bunch of training and later on they do another five-minute test, you don't just have those two power averages in a vacuum with no other data. You may actually be able to inform, like we said earlier, if you were training for a 20-minute test or a 5-minute test or whatever, and you do only anaerobic training in between, you could probably infer whether or not you got better aerobically or anaerobically. And that is that part of coaching, or hopefully if your coach is working with you on a long-term basis or at least on a more holistic basis, then you just... Slapping in average power numbers for certain durations every month or something like that, that they would understand because they would know what else you've been doing. Yeah. I mean, I think that's actually a really good point because that is kind of what I do. And that's what empirical cycling coaches all do. I mean, this is why we don't do canned plans. This is why we write workouts by hand. Like I, every week I write a bunch of workouts by hand. It takes a lot of time, but it's the only way I know how to do it. And working closely with people like this. You really get a sense of fatigue, especially. You know, if somebody does a five minute test, and it's not a good one, or like a 20 minute test, or a 30 minute test, 40 minute test, whatever it is, and you go, wow, this is underperformance. It's not like we need to reach for a special metric to tell us that this was more aerobic than before, and the training worked. You know, most of the time, I'm like, You gotta keep resting. This is not good and you'll feel better soon, but we're gonna let the legs come back to you. We're not gonna go looking for your legs every day with more testing. And, you know, I think actually going back to your point about, what was it, the BMI and, you know, using it as like a population average versus, you know, an individual metric. You know, I think individualizing your training like this is actually really, really critical because when it comes to certain ways of training, some people have a better response than others. And this is one of those like high, well, you know, kind of bird's eye view, like kind of looking at the map and not the battle as it were. And so this kind of gets to the... What was it? The fallacy of division. So there's two main fallacies that I've been noticing a lot in scientific literature lately, especially, and we're actually going to talk in depth about one of these in the next Wattstock episode. And which is not to say that, you know, people are, you know, stupid, because a lot of these people who are making these fallacies are a lot smarter than I am. But I mean, orders of magnitude. An individual. What kind of workouts work for this person to drive this adaptation? It's different for everybody. And what's called the fallacy of division is making the individual equivalent to the average, right? So here's a good example. Well, the Wikipedia example is like the second grade class on average likes ice cream. Joey is a second grader in this class. Therefore, Joey likes ice cream. And that may not be the case. Joey might hate ice cream. Right, right, right. And that's interesting too because hopefully if you are working with an athlete and you are – say your goal is to – you do an analysis of their data and you say, oh, this is the area that looks deficient, the LA Max, FTP, whatever it is. And you're like, all right, we're going to do – I think if we make this metric better you'll race better and then you do it you go out and you try to make this metric better or you try to keep it where it is or whatever and then you get feedback of I feel like shit or I'm racing like shit or what have you hopefully after a little bit you may come back and say oh maybe our initial assumption of let's keep this metric as the target one to improve would change. Like, just because maybe a high VLA max for this fallacy of division is correlated with, as a whole, people winning races doesn't necessarily mean that you, individually, need a high VLA max to win races. Yeah, completely. And, you know, let's talk about the fallacy of division in an FTP testing way, too. Because this is, I think... very relatable to most people. So let's take a ramp test, right? And so what is it? It's like the last, you know, average minute, the last minute average or something like that, the highest average, whatever it is, that you can achieve. Yeah, it's the highest average power for the last minute that you like fully complete. Like if you, you know, notch it up another 10 watts or whatever your steps are, and then you blow up and die. 30 seconds into that minute, that one doesn't count, so we'll take whatever the previous value was. Right, okay. And so let's say it's like the average of the population, their FTP is about 75% of that. You know, some people, big data sets, I don't know, might say 80. Some big data sets might say 82% or 78 or whatever it is. That does not mean that holds true for everybody because there is a distribution of people because just the nature of, you know, Variation and just the nature of nature, I guess. Populations, yeah. Yeah. And so when you look at that, you think, okay, does this actually work for me versus does this work for everybody individually? Now, that is a very different problem than this is the average and we're just going to say this works for everybody. Yeah. I think one of the other things that you like to bag on this is the... four millimolar lactate levels. I was going to say that for the next Wattstock, but yeah, we can get into that for a couple minutes, sure. But that's another example where you pool a bunch of athletes, you make them all do lactate tests, and the average comes out around four. Great, that's fine. That's what you report in the paper. But then to say, oh, every athlete in this group hit maximal lactate steady state at four. is silly because you can just look at the plot and see that not all the dots are on the same dot. You can imagine they have some scatter to them. They have a distribution or a shape and that automatically means that four is going to probably well describe. I'm looking at it and the standard deviation for the one I'm looking at averages 4.021 which is good accuracy for a lactate test even though they only have three sig figs it should be 4.02 regardless standard deviation is 0.70. Yeah, it's big. It's a big range, yeah. So like maximal lactate steady state, I'm just looking. They've got 16 test values here, and we're going to, I'll put this screenshot up in the next Wattstock. I'm looking at average values between 3.05 to, what's a big one here? 5.52 as a range for maximal lactate steady state for treadmill running. And we're also, we can, this is a good study because they compared it to a three-minute step test and a five-minute step test. And actually just looking at some of these values, some things don't make much sense. We get weird things. So like, so for an individual, like we'll look at maximal lactate steady state. You know, we get stuff like a 5.52 maximal lactate steady state. 5.52 milliliters, sorry, millimoles per liter. And for a three-minute stage ramp test versus a five-minute stage ramp test at the same speed during the ramp test, we can look at 4.24 millimoles per liter versus five millimoles per liter. So it's lower in the step test versus in the maximal lactate steady state. A lot of this actually calls into question some of the testing protocols. And part of this paper, actually a big part of this paper, is questioning what works in these protocols. And by their protocols, the four millimoles works. But it's funny, they compare speed at four millimoles to speed at maximum lactate steady state, and they don't find a correlation. But literally, the title of the paper is about justifying four millimoles per liter. And it's funny. I think the other funny thing about that is that because of the way of the unit, millimoles per liter, numbers come out rather small, like four, ten. 10 is really high. 1 is basically the lower level of if you're doing any sort of one of these tests that you would see. And so you're naturally thinking, oh, the difference between 4 and 5 isn't that big. It's 1. And so I think that's another numeracy, like numerical literacy type problem where you may just see a number thrown out like that, like 4. plus or minus 0.7. Like, oh, 0.7 is really small. But that's almost a 20% difference over that just regular single standard deviation error bar. And so I think that is also a component that gets weaved into this is that because we are dealing with numbers, you kind of have to know or have a good intuition for when is... Yeah, mm-hmm. for W Prime or something like that. Well, you know, is that good? Without knowing context, 40, who knows? Is that 40 out of 100? 40 out of a million? I don't know. Yeah, and is this a GC writer or is this a strong man? Yeah, exactly. You have no idea. And so having some additional numerical literacy is really important. Yeah. And, you know, it's funny because we're going to talk a lot about this, but now that I'm thinking about it, let's talk about this a little bit now. Which is, you know, a lot of these lactate numbers don't make much sense. Because I, you know, I mentioned that, you know, there are people where you get good correlations. So we get like, you know, for MLSS versus five minute ramp and three minute ramp, you know, it's 3.8, 3.6, 3.7. Okay, that's a great correlation. But we also get people where the five minute and three minute ramp is lower than their MLSS. And we also get five and three minute ramp that's higher than their MLSS. Like not by... with 0.2 millimoles or 0.02 millimoles. It's like a millimole per liter. It's a pretty big delta. It's huge. Yeah. Yeah. And so there's a lot of stuff that goes into lactate testing that is hard to say what happened and why. And we're going to talk about this in the next Wattstock, where lactate needs a lot of interpretation. And it needs, you know, it could be different day to day based on hydration. Hydration can, you know, if you're dehydrated, you're going to have less blood volume and that's going to make these numbers look a little bigger and vice versa. If you're severely dehydrated, if you're super hydrated, if you are, if you've had enough water that you were about to kill yourself, these numbers are going to look a lot smaller too. So let's hope, let's hope you don't have that much water. Don't drink, don't drink water in excess. Don't drink. Many things. Most things you shouldn't drink into excess, and it turns out water is one of them. Yeah. All right. Anyway, so where were we with these fallacies? Oh, one of the other fallacies that's kind of the flip side of the fallacy of division is called the fallacy of conglomeration? No, not that. Fallacy of composition. Composition. Thank you. Not conglomeration. Composition. The fallacy of composition, this is actually what I was getting to when I was talking about individualizing workouts, is thinking that what works for one person will work for everybody, basically. So if Joey's a second grader who likes cake, this second grade class all likes cake. No, they like ice cream on average, not cake. Joey's a cake guy. Right. That's cool with Joey. That's cool with me. I, you know, I couldn't pick cake or ice cream. You know what I mean? Like I, it's like trying to, how do you pick a favorite child? Yeah. I think this is one that people are probably more familiar with when they, especially because of social media, they can see what their favorite pros do for workouts and be like, oh, that's what that person does. That's going to help me be as fast as this person that I love to follow on Instagram. Yeah. And you're like, ah, ha, ha, actually, it doesn't always work like that. It would be awesome if it did because, you know, it actually is kind of cool to see a glimpse into what professional elite international cyclists are doing. But firstly, they're obviously not showing you everything they're doing. And secondly, your training background is not theirs. Yeah. Yeah, because what gets you from... You know, Cat 5 to Cat 3 is not going to be the same that gets you from Cat 3 to a World Tour contract. And what gets you from, you know, 3 to 1, 1 to, you know, Conti team and yada, yada, yada, it's all going to be different, potentially. If it's not, then that's actually a rarity. And, you know, it's funny because I think I think in some of his other WKO webinars, Tim has talked about how he doesn't train two athletes the same, right? Like one person does more intermittent intervals. Like somebody does a lot more 15-15s and over-unders type stuff. And another person does a lot more steady state type intervals. And he talks about, and I can see the same thing in the people I coach, where if we flip these things, if this person does this style of training and this person does this style of training, it's not going to work. And I think that's a good point that comes back to your whole stance on canned training plans. Yeah, which I understand. Why canned training plans are a thing? Because not everybody can afford a coach like me or an empirical cycling coach, and that's okay. and I understand why you would do that. But at the same time, if you're really looking for individualized training, if you're looking for what's going to make me the fastest, there's a non-zero chance, there's actually a decent chance that a canned training plan can be it. But it's like if you have the budget, you would want to, it doesn't have to be us, you would want to go get a coach to make sure that what's working for you individually is actually the best thing for you rather than, you know, what's the best thing? Like, for instance, like what made your coach fast or what made this coach's star athlete fast? These are not necessarily the same things. Yeah. And I think that's interesting too, especially for me coming from a background of swimming where even in college, the most individualized we got, it was that there was a sprint. a mid-distance and a distance group and still everyone who was a sprinter we all did the same workouts basically only modified for depending on what your stroke specialty was but you got to see that all of us were doing the exact same workouts and some people did amazing and went to NCAAs and you know competed for national titles and some of us didn't me in particular didn't necessarily do that Even though we were all doing the same thing. And sure, you can argue that, oh, what were the other things that these people were doing? Maybe you weren't doing these other things. But there was a big enough group of us that – and we're all in college. So you're all kind of living together. You're all kind of eating the same food. You all have comparable but not exactly the same schedules for class and things like that. So it's almost this natural experiment to show that, yes, what works for one person and what got this one person to – earn a trip to NCAA championships is not what will earn this other person. Yeah. And you're actually a good example in your training is comparing what I know is a normal swimming training load from when you were swimming versus what you're doing now for sprinting. The training load is like 20% of what you were doing in swimming, and it's better for you. Because we've done this where- Oh, for sure. I remember government shut down a couple of years ago, and you were like, let's train every day. And I was like, woo, let's do it. It wasn't working for you doing that much training. Yeah, and actually... So we learned, yeah. And I have some friends who I swam with in college and they later on went to do master's swimming. And obviously you have a job and a real life and all this stuff. And it's just like master's anything else, even though master's swimming starts at 19. It's master's anything else. So you have group, he was still doing group workouts, but he was only doing them three, four, maybe five days a week. And obviously not two and a half hours every time like we were in college. And he's like, man, I'm going faster than I did in college. He was faster at 25 with a full-time job. doing hobbyist training than he was when we were in college doing 20 hours a week slam to the wall. Yeah. So why don't we kind of wrap this up a little bit in terms of training to the test versus training for performance? Yeah. Yeah. So what kind of short takeaways can we get from this? I think some of it would be just avoid, and this is maybe a callback to the idea about rigid rule following but avoid just as much as it is a great ego stroke just the desire to see numbers go up for the sake of bigness like everyone loves to be like oh hey so what's your FTP or whatever what's your PMAX all these numbers like It's cool and it's fun. It's, you know, whatever. It's like asking people how much they bench press or whatever, which for cyclists is like zero pounds. But if you are just focused on numbers going up, you're probably missing the forest for the trees. Yeah. And like, for instance, if somebody wants to have a giant FRC, like my FRC right now is 45. And if I did a whole full range of testing, it would probably be like in the very low 50s. Now, do you want a 50 kilojoule FRC? if it comes at the expense of having 180-watt FTP at 90 kilograms of body weight, for most people, I would say no. For a track sprinter, I think that sounds like a totally good trade-off. You know what I mean? Yes, yes, exactly. So not only is it like an individual need, it's also like these kinds of things are metrics to describe you relatively. You know what I mean? 150 kilojoules of FRC is very different than Andre Greipel's, like, let's say 25 to 30 kilojoules, because he's got a 2,000 watt sprint, but he's got a 420, 430 watt FTP. So, yeah, you know, he's got this, we've got the same anaerobic power, but he's got much more aerobic power. And the drop in FRC describes... It doesn't say he's a less good anaerobic athlete than me because he could probably beat the piss out of me in even a match sprint, right? Yeah, or his kilo. His kilo is probably outstanding. His kilo is amazing, I'm sure. He's got like 900 watts or 1,000 for a minute. Man, I've got to test that guy. God, what a good athlete. And so this is one of the differences where you need to think first about what kind of performance do you need versus just saying I need this metric for this kind of performance, right? So like if you are like a time trialer and you want your FTP to keep going up, does this come at the expense of doing zero anaerobic training? Because if you don't test your one minute power or you only do like 50 to 75% of max for one minute and this... feeds a model, either a critical power model or the WKO5 model or the GC model, Golden Cheetah, whatever you've got there. If that's what's keeping your described FTP high, this is also not a real thing. You know what I mean? Because the model's just describing the data that it has. Yeah. And I think that's a good point. this kind of you I think we kind of touched on in the are you you are training too hard for criteriums episode where you may think that because crits are oh you think anaerobic cyclocross you think anaerobic like mountain bike you think you know hard punchy anaerobic things so that's cool and then you fixate on that yeah right you fixate on that being oh that must be the key because that's why it's different than a road race or something like that. And you're like, ah, well, yes and no. Yes and no. When you take a snippet out of a larger context, it can be misinterpreted. Like my girlfriend and I were riding mountain bikes a couple weeks ago down somewhere south where it was warm. And for like one 20-second hill, I crushed her by like 10 or 15 seconds. I just rode away from her. She was like, how did you do that? She was pushing as hard as she could. And I was like, well, this is what having a massive anaerobic capacity can do for you. However, that was not reflective of the rest of the day where I was getting dropped because I have very low anaerobic power and very high body weight. So she's a great climber. I could drop her in a start, but she's going to catch me, you know, five, ten minutes later or less. It's about putting all the pieces together, not about just making this one metric better or this other, your preferred ratio of things better. Yeah. And so choosing your hierarchy of what's important here is hugely important. Criterium Racing, for cyclocross racing, for mountain bike racing, for track racing. You're not going to see somebody on the track winning the old school Omnium, not the current international Omnium, but the previous one that had the Kilo, the Flying 250, and the Individual Pursuit along with the other races and not the Tempo race. That is somebody like Ed Clancy is an amazing guy for something like that. The ultimate sprint duro, one of the best team pursuiters of all time. He's not so good currently because he's anaerobically a little too good, but he's aerobically not quite there, which is why somebody like Viviani or Norman Hansen are great because they have the right profile. They're aerobically strong enough while also having huge anaerobic power. Yes, exactly. Oh, to be not weak enough with a 400 watt FTP or not strong enough with a 400 watt FTP. But yes, I think that's a good point. So metrics are great and it can make training a lot easier. You can imagine training when you have no metrics. That sounds worse. But yeah, you just have to really be careful and not to discourage the use of metrics, but you just have to be careful and understand. what the metrics are good for, and try not to fixate on one, even though everyone loves to fixate on FTP. Yeah. And if you want to kind of prioritize, do a self-diagnosis of this kind of thing, we can actually go back to what I opened the webinar with, which was having low anaerobic power is usually like, I got to the end of the race in the sprint, and I was going as hard as I could, and I was getting gapped. Like I was getting dropped. Somebody put like three bike lengths into me in 50 meters. And I came in like fifth, even though I was second wheel coming out of that last corner. Okay. Now that's a time to work on your anaerobic power. You're getting to where you want to be, where you need to be, and you don't quite have the kick. Okay. Now you need some anaerobic power. However, if you are getting to the end of a race or, or, you know, at any point in the race, you're just kind of running out of steam. That is a sign that you need more aerobic power. And it's kind of regardless of the metrics. You know, this is an easy way to figure out what do I need to work on? And then once you figure this out, you figure out, okay, what is my metric to show that I am improving this way? For a lot of people, the... and me included. The metric that says you're improving aerobic power is FTP. Now, does this mean that you have to cut out anaerobic training? Like if you like getting to the gym once a week or something like that, do you have to stop? Not necessarily, but it's one of those things where you've got to individualize it and make sure that it works for you. I think that's a good summary. Yeah. Why don't we wrap it up here then? So as always, thanks everybody for listening. iTunes rating is great. And if you want, of course, to individualize your coaching or you want to individualize your training, you can always email me empiricalcycling at gmail.com to become an empirical cycling athlete. We are taking on athletes or you can book us for a consultation. We will look at your training and answer all of your questions, et cetera, et cetera. and so share the podcast as always remember we're ad free if you want to donate and support the show that way you can do so empiricalcycling.com slash donate thanks everybody for your donations this month and last month really really helps the show I did find a new recording platform, remote recording platform that is not Zencaster. That is a little more reliable. Kyle and I tested it out. So we'll be getting some interviews going very shortly. And also I asked Andy Cog to be on the show and he said yes. So that's going to be awesome. Woo! Yeah. Nerds! It's going to be great. I am so looking forward to it. And it's not going to just be like, Andy, tell us about your trading zones. Oh, sorry. Is it levels? Are they prescriptive or descriptive? We're going to try to dive deeper than that, which is going to be great. Anyway, so if you want to reach out, empiricalcycling at gmail.com, Instagram at empiricalcycling, weekend AMAs in the stories, give me a follow there, and follow Kyle's cats, Millie Kelvin and Silly Millie Meachie, right? Yeah, that's it. Awesome. We'll put a link up to the cats' Instagrams in the show notes, definitely head there, check out the cats, they're hilarious. Alright, thanks everybody. Bye. 