Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Kolie Moore. Thank you, everybody, for listening as usual. And if you are new here, please consider subscribing to the podcast if you like what you're hearing. And if you are a returning listener, we really want to thank you for coming back. And we would not be here without all of you, and especially without all of you spreading the word about the podcast if you're enjoying it. And whenever somebody writes in and says it's their favorite podcast, or they've learned a lot, or they've gotten a lot faster, I cannot tell you how much that means to me. So thank you, everybody, for all of that. And if you would like to support the podcast besides letting people know that you like it so much, it would be great if you could donate to the podcast, empiricalcycling.com slash donate. Your donations keep the lights on here. And if you would really like to become a supporter of Empirical Cycling, you can become one of our clients. We are always taking on athletes. For Coaching, and we are always doing consultations. So if you would like to, you know, get ahead of training for next year, shoot me an email at empiricalcycling at gmail.com. And you can also email me if you'd like to consult and you have any questions about your own training, especially if you don't know if you can afford coaching or something like that. or you don't want to commit to coaching or you really enjoy coaching yourself and kind of learning the process, we are here to help you make that process better with a consultation. We are going to give you the tools that you need specifically for you to meet the goals that you are trying to achieve and whether that's incorporating strength training better into your training to improve your sprint or just because for health, those reasons, that's all great. If you want to talk about periodizing a season, if you want to talk about Maintaining In Season Without Burning Out, that's a big one for a lot of folks. We're really happy and everybody's got individual needs so we can talk about exactly what you specifically need instead of the typical advice that you kind of hope works for you but also, you know, it's kind of hit or miss. And I've done a lot of consultations so I can tell you for sure that that is a definite thing. That's why we only do one-on-one coaching also. So if you would like to reach out for any of that, empiricalcycling at gmail.com. If you would like to just kind of get more training content, follow me on Instagram at Empirical Cycling, and that's where I do a weekend AMA up in the stories. So go check those out. And also that's where I ask questions for the podcast. So in the last 20, 30 minutes of each podcast, we typically get two listener questions and we... Call them a little bit, but for the most part, we get to most of them. So if you'd like to ask a question on any of the topics, I will leave up a prompt in my stories. Usually the AMAs are an orange background and the Instagram stuff is a purple background. So whenever you see that purple background with a question box, that is for a podcast. So go ask a question. If you want to do a little consideration of questions, please. But if they also don't fit in the box. Well, don't DM me the question. I will probably not be checking that before we record. So anyway, we have a really cool podcast today because I don't know if anybody remembers this, but a couple of months ago, maybe a year ago, I mentioned... that I had a couple clients who are really excellent and experienced bike racers and have a lot of knowledge that would be great to pass on to folks. And this is one of them today. He was a coaching client of mine for two, probably a little over two years, something like that. with goals of doing well at Masters Nats and just, you know, getting stronger, generally speaking. And, you know, he's a guy who's been racing for 20, more than 20 years, something like that. And so I had a great time working with him. and honestly, I was surprised sometimes that even with his experience that I could still help him out when we had a lot of calls after races and we could kind of break it down and discuss what could happen, what should happen because despite his experience, when I'm coaching somebody, I see something a little bit differently sometimes. I'm thinking about energy management strategies and stuff like that and we kind of talk about that too. And for the most part, you know, for as much as I've been able to help him, which always surprised me, he has taught me so much about race strategy and race recon, people recon, that kind of stuff. We talk about, you know, the courses, we talk about, you know, watching the wind or, you know, the focus in bike racing, the mental aspect of staying focused and how important that is to keep that up or reading body language and other people. You know, we're also talking about Aerodynamics, and Buying Speed. And by the way, he says that's okay. So if you're wondering, as long as, of course, you've got the means to do so, not everybody does, but we kind of talk about that a little bit too. You know, we talk about racing all the way to the line as opposed to celebrating, and we talk about strengths and weaknesses and how to practice your tactics, how to hone your craft and going to group rides and practice crits and stuff like that, low stakes places where you can can kind of mess around and screw it up if you want to learn how to expand your decision tree is how we put it in the podcast. So anyway, this is a really, really fun podcast. I'm so glad that he has taken a step back from serious racing and training, and I could get him on the podcast to talk about this. So I hope everybody learns a lot, especially if you've been kind of struggling with race strategy and stuff like that. So this is my interview with Giancarlo Bianchi, also known as GC. So yeah, I'll catch you all on the other side. Tell me a bit about your racing history, because you've been racing for a long time, so give us the stats, like age, duration, et cetera, et cetera. Where are you now? Where did you start? Yeah, so I've been racing for over 20 years at this point, and it's always weird saying that, just because I don't know that I've been doing anything in my life other than living for that long, right? I started racing, my dad got me a road bike, a legitimate road bike for kids when I was 10. You know, he used to race bikes himself, and so I always saw him, like, kind of riding, training, and that's how I was, the interest grew in that way. Started racing as a junior, I think, like, either 14 or 15, and then, like, basically, like, never stopped. You know, and I originally from Miami, Florida, you know, born and raised there, and being a 130-pound skinny guy racing against dudes who were, like, linebackers, like... Yeah, with no elevation. With no elevation, you're forced, at least I was forced to learn how to race in order to do anything, you know, because basically everyone's just kind of like waiting for the sprint there, and then everyone just throws out their, I don't know, 15, 17, you know, 100 watt sprints and like I couldn't do shit, right? So I moved to, I lived in New York for two years and that was like a, A really big learning experience. You know, New York or the Northeast in general, just like there's actually real racing going on there. Shout out to people in Brooklyn and New York City, park racing, love that shit. You know, waking up at 6.30 in the morning, racing across the park. To me, that was always amazing. Everyone like always like kind of hated it. And like, you know, I guess like me just like new to the area. I'm like, why? Like there goes like the Metropolitan Museum and we're like racing. This is amazing, right? But yeah, the racing there was definitely more dynamic, and I got connected with a group of guys down there, or up there, rather, from Guyana. It's like a really interesting, like, Caribbean culture there in New York City as well. And they taught me a lot of things as well. And then, you know, being in a place that didn't have a little elevation, you know, definitely helped and just, like, kind of got me stronger. And then going back to South Florida because I couldn't find relevant work after I graduated from NYU. You know, I was just like a lot stronger, smarter, and yeah, I started to really excel when I moved back to South Florida. I think I was ahead of a curve with regards to training with power and paying attention to things that were everything aero. And that was, I guess like that was just like my thing. And no one really kind of had figured that out yet. And so that was like my advantage. I left, moved out to Boulder nine years ago. Wow. And yeah, coming here was a slap in the face, as you can probably imagine, you know, elevation and then being raised in Boulder where like you're legitimately racing with sometimes pros or people are trying to aspire to be pros or just like 17-year-old monsters and stuff like that. You know, I at first was just like, holy shit, I'm out of my league here, but then just kind of sticking with it and like, Learning, you know, kind of like the edge and flows of how people race here and learning my competition and then kind of just relying on my knowledge of racing, right? You know, I was able to eventually get to a point where I started to excel. I was just like, okay, like, and now I think, and that's why I kind of float my own boat, but I think people view me as like, you know, like a good racer here, right? Like maybe not the best or one of the best, but definitely people who were like, if they see me doing something, they're like, we probably need to shut that down. It's a badge of honor, but it also kind of sucks to be marked, for sure. Yeah, for sure. Now, continuing on our theme of numbers and stats, though, you are somebody where people have come to me when they found out we were working together and I was coaching you. They were asking, like, what's his FTP? And they swore it was 100 watts higher than it actually is. Like, they were like, it's got to be 350, if not like 380. And I'm like, you know, at 130, 135 pounds, I mean, he would be world tour, like at that level. Right. You know, well, if you wanted to, you know, make that kind of chicken scratch, I guess, to go, you know, work for people who are actually fast. I mean, I... Like, thank you to everyone who thinks that. I fucking wish. I mean, just straight up here, like, my FTP, depending on the time of year, will be anywhere between, what, 260 to, like, when I'm fucking flying, like, maybe 290. And I'm at, like, 140, right? But, yeah, I mean, people have told me that too, and I just kind of, like, laugh because I don't think they believe it. For sure, I mean, I've come to realize that, like, I've beaten people with, like, five watts per kilo or more, like, often, right? And that just speaks to, one, their inefficiency on the bike, I think, and then, two, their inability to read a race, right? Yeah. Yeah. And I think, you know, when we started working together, that was one of the things that You had said to me, you know, even before, you know, on our intro call, it was like, you were, you were, you were talking about how much you love the chess game. And every single time that we've talked about races and how they've gone and kind of breaking it down or, you know, even heading into important races, the, I hear you in my head because you said it so many times, you're like, it sounds like you're getting frustrated and you're like, it's fucking chess. It's a chess game. It's not about the power, it's fucking chess. Yeah. A former friend and former coach, like he said, he said this to me, I mean, he probably got it from somewhere else. He was like, FTP gets you a seat at the table. And then after that, you know, it's like what you do that's not related to power that actually makes a race for yourself, right? Yeah. Yeah. And I think also, It really starts to become apparent once you and everybody else who is capable of getting a win in a race, where all of your, between your skill sets and your physiology, you start to become more evenly matched. Because in the Cat Force, how many times have we seen somebody who's destined for greatness, like up in New England, you know, John Jantz was riding away from everybody. uh, what's his name, who's on Ineos now, is riding away from everybody, um, Magnus, yeah, Magnus Sheffield, yeah, uh, and it's like, you, they get in the fours, and they just like, take off from kilometer zero, and never to be seen again, and everybody's sitting there like, okay, I guess we're waiting for second today, then they do it in the threes, and then sometimes they do it in the twos even, um, so, so, yeah, besides that, yeah, oh, sorry, go ahead. No, I was just gonna say, I kind of, I kind of hate that. Right? Like, not like from a racist perspective, but like, you know, like from a coaching perspective, like, sometimes I'll, people will contact me and they're like, oh, I want to get to a CAT 2 or 3 or whatever, and they're just starting out. And then I'm like, they're like, I'm five, six points away from upgrading. I'm like, can you help me? I'm like, how many races have you won? They're like, none. And I'm like, you know, it's just like what I tell people, it's like. Don't be in a rush to upgrade, right? Like, learn how to race when it's easy, right? Because the racing tactics stay the same, the races just get faster. And I don't think a lot of people realize that. So, I mean, like, guys who can just ride away from people, you know, like, great, you can do it, but you're not learning how to race. And I don't know if we can, I'm going to... Use a name here, I don't know if I should, but there was this, I won't, there was a guy who was really strong, he's still racist, he lived in South Florida for a bit, and he, his background was really intractable, and he, in the Cat 5s, he was just riding away from memory, Cat 4s, he was just riding away from memory, and then Cat 3s the same, I remember like, this crate out in Dade City, he like, lapped a field, something ridiculous like that, and like, the people in 2 field were like, Man, alright, we're like, we're paying attention, we're just waiting for him, and then, sure enough, he got to P1-2, he tried to do the same shit, and everyone just, like, drafted him. And, like, all of a sudden, like, he just couldn't ride away from anyone, and then his results just went, right, I mean, he still, again, he still races, like, he finally figured out how to race, but it's just, like, now, you know, it's a bit harder to learn how to race when you're at a level, uh, at a similar level to everyone else, or maybe everyone's just like a touch beyond you, right? So, yeah. Yeah. I remember in New England, for a while, we had an upgrade guy named JD, and he would refuse to upgrade people a lot of the time if they were riding away from fields. You know, and this was a very kind of old school mentality because, you know, he remembered the old days when, you know, you would have to basically win a pro road race to get your cat won. And he was like, we're going to do a little bit of that, but I see you riding away from everybody. You don't get your CAT 2 until you show me that you can navigate a bunch sprint and be on the podium at least in a mass of at least 10 or 20 people. Just to show me that you can do it safely, so that way when I upgrade you, when you are pack fodder, you're not a danger to everybody. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So you've compiled a list. for us of kind of points to touch on about, you know, kind of racing beyond your power and being faster than your watts would make people think you are. So, I mean, the first one you put up here, and I agree with it, is it's not about power. And as you've said a thousand times, it's fucking chess. So, tell me your kind of, how much you fell in love with like the chess game of bike racing. Yeah, you know, I always, like, again, racing as a junior, and, you know, just through the ranks and through the years, like, I always just kind of struggled just being successful in cycling and bike racing, but it was always just, like, this thing that, like, I kind of just continuously worked at, and, like, like, the slope, I think, like, the slope regression, like, helped a lot. I mean, like, I remember racing as a junior, there was this kid, his name is Keith, at the time, a kid, Keith Norris. He was like, he was going one-on-one with Tyler Farrar, if people still know who that is, at fucking Nationals. Like, that's how good he was. But then, like, USA Cycling took him to Belgium and he burnt out, right? And then Tyler Farrar, like, itself, because I think he's from Seattle, Washington, and, like, it's just, like, similar weather, and this kid was, like, from sunny South Florida, and he's just like, what the fuck am I doing here? Anyways, I think that just makes a slow progression, just like... kind of like sticking with it, like helped a lot with that regard. But then like, again, just, you know, just kind of really doing some like post analysis in terms of what went down in a race, what, what kind of like a retrospective where you sit down and like, what went right, what went wrong, what could I have done differently? And I don't think a lot of people do that, one, or maybe not enough, right? Like I would even do that for races that I did well on, well at, or That I even won, right? Like, I remember there was this road racing somewhere in South Florida. I won it. And I'm like, how could I have won it better? Right? What do you think better? Like, expending less energy? Or, like, a better, like, it was too much of a gamble, what you did? Thinking, like, really thinking back, like, how I got myself in the race winning move, right? And then, like, realize, yeah, I guess, like, energy expenditures. It's like, did I need to do this? Did I need to do that? And then, like, kind of thinking about, like, what happened in the breakaway, and then, like, kind of, like, leading up to, like, the end where people started attacking, and then, like, you know, kind of knowing the competition and knowing what people were good at and or not, right, and perhaps trying to capitalize on those things, kind of, like, that way, right, where you start to, like, just think about those things, and then, and then, actually, not, the very following next year, So that road was, of course, flat, but it was really windy that year, and I got in the breakaway because, like, the wind ended up ripping up the field. However, like, I realized, like, I wasn't in an optimal position in the beginning of the race to even get to the breakaway, but I just, like, kind of fought through it. And so the following year, same race, similar win, and I was just like, oh, shit, I know exactly what's going to happen. Right, so, like, I told my teammates, I'm like, so, if you could imagine. You had a tailwind, it was like a triangle-shaped road race. The tailwind was like a start-finish line, so as a group of 30, 50 people, we're all traveling with the tailwind. We're going like 30 miles an hour at like 150 watts or something stupid. Everyone's just like chatting and having fun. And I'm like, I knew as soon as we made that right turn, it was going to be crosswind and everyone's going to be on the yellow line. Of course, there's the yellow line rule. So I tell all my teammates, I'm like, we need to move up. Like, all of you fuckers need to move on, right? And everyone was just like, GC, you calm down, like, whatever, right? And I'm like, all right. As you're doing 100 watts at like 35 miles an hour down the road. Yeah, I'm like, see you guys later. And I remember I moved to like the top five before we made that right turn. And then sure enough, as soon as you made that right turn, people at the front started attacking and I was just following wheels. I wasn't really like having to expend too much energy. I remember looking back, and, like, the fields just strung out. Like, the moto was telling people, like, hey, if you don't, I'm going to DQ you, because, like, everyone's just trying to get that draft that didn't exist, because, again, of this, like, the center line rule. And we just rode away. And I was just like, sweet, I'm going to break away. And I know what to do now. You know what I mean? Like, stuff like that, right? Like, I won a race the previous year, and I'm like, how can I do this better? And then, sure enough, it ended up just working out. And then I ended up winning that race again. Nice. Actually, I wanted to, because I remember a lot of the time you would call me after a race to kind of break down what happened, pretty much regardless of whether you won or were on the podium or did well, or you had a shit day where you questioned everything you thought you knew about bike racing. Yeah. And we can talk about a couple of those, but I want to talk about your win. in the, um, at the state champs, uh, last year at the Colorado state championship road race, because that was one where you would think a guy with like, you know, four and a half watts per kilo-ish, um, in a, you know, at elevation with a climbing race with a bunch of, you know, local Colorado hitters, how the fuck is he gonna win this race? So, like, that is a perfect example about, um, about pretty much everything you were just talking about. So, uh, why don't you take us through How that race went down, and how you got that win. Sure. So, um, so it's on this course that a lot of local guys kind of hate. Um, it's like this, uh, uh, two, it's like an out and back, but like two 180s, right? Um, but the in-between, however, is these kind of rolling roads where the climbs are long enough that you're like kind of reaching VO2 max if you're just like really gunning at it. and it's also really windy in that area. They actually have like turbines up there because there's just kind of like wind. It's like sits on top of a plateau or mesa rather. And actually for the, just to set up the course, like it's on the same road or like you can, because I think, I remember that map where it really looked like a giant, like kind of sneaky hot dog. Yeah, exactly. And you could see somebody off the front on the other side of the road when you were going up the, it's like, like an out and back TT course. Yeah, totally. Yeah, exactly. That's exactly, that's a great way to describe it. It's making a hot dog. So, you know, the roadway started and you had some cinch guys on the race and really strong guys. But I think that they just had like an inflated sense of ego going to that race. And sometimes like, Some businesses are a good thing, right, when you recognize this, because then, like, they could just kind of do all the work for you, and you just have to survive. You know, I think one thing people kind of don't realize is that we're all human, right? These guys are maybe younger than me, but if you're 19 and you're not pro, it's probably not going to happen for you, right, to be perfectly honest. And, you know, these guys are a little older than that, and yeah, like, they're just smashing up every hill, right? and I'm just drafting, right? I mean, of course, like even in the draft going uphill, you still have to throw down Watts, but even though I'm not insanely strong like my FTP, but I'm pretty decent at like a six minute or less effort, right? In terms of like being able to match guys. Especially in the draft. And doing it over. Because I've got here, I've got the big climb here is two and a half minutes. And I've got you doing an average of 344 watts for one of these climbs. And in watts per kilo, that is about 5.3. Yeah, yeah. And that's a repeated effort that you did, you know, over the course of the first couple laps of that race. Yeah, yeah. I mean, like, 10, 5 or 10. Yeah, I mean, like, it's an interesting skill set where, like, I guess, like... You know, sure, maybe my FTP isn't like super high, but I guess like my repeatability is really good. But yeah, anyways, they just tore the field apart, right? And then ended up just being two of them with me, I want to say three others, if I remember correctly, maybe four others. And we were just sitting on their wheels, right? And then it got to a point where they're like, still Deploying the same tactic, realizing that, okay, you're not going to shake us. You need to change something. Right? And then, I think, when they finally realized that, one of their guys, like, went off the front. And I was like, and I kind of knew who he was, and I knew he can, like, kind of TT well, or just kind of ride away well. And I'm like, this isn't great. So then, now we all started rotating. But then, like, he kind of died on his own, which was kind of fun. Because then, like, he kind of realized, like, oh. They just burn all their matches trying to literally ride away from us. And when they realized they couldn't, now they definitely can't. And then the other guy, like, when we kind of caught this dude, and I know you probably have my embrace notes in front of you, but if I remember correctly, you know, when we caught him, I totally expected the other guy to kind of... Do the same, right? Like, use your teammates, right? Like, you know, your teammate attacks, he gets pulled back, and like, now you go. But there was still a lot of racing left at that point. And so, sometimes, when I was racing my teammates, I tell them sometimes, I'm like, hey, listen, this is like a general tactic of what I think might happen, or what we should probably focus on. But of course, you know, a race is very fluid, and you have to be able to think. You know, quickly on your feet, and I told him, I'm like, listen, like, if for whatever reason you see me attacking, just trust me, right? Like, I have, like, this, I don't know, I feel like I have this, like, this sense of, like, when to go, and, and that's kind of what happened in that race, where, like, he got pulled back, everyone was kind of like, meh, and then I'm like, oh, I could probably attack now, and I think to break it down, you were recognizing that everybody else was tired. Yeah. Like they had been smashing. And so I went and looked at the speed before you got off the front. And the average speed was 23.9 miles an hour. And your speed off the front, by the way, 24.7 for the last bit, like for the last 40 minutes of your breakaway rolling in. that can, that people can think about is like recognizing when the energy is gone from the people you're racing with. Yeah, yeah, um, for sure. And, you know, like, I sensed that it was, it felt like a good time to attack, but like, I also knew that some, but I also knew what was gonna, gonna, gonna happen behind me, right? You had two cinch guys, and then you had everyone else. The two cinch guys were just like attacking. over and over, right? So, like, they were just showing their streak. Now, if I were to go, and if I were to get into the gap, everyone who wasn't, who was in the cinch guy are going to look at the cinch guys. And then the cinch guys are going to look at them. And then, like, you know, in bike racing, it's like, you only need that moment of hesitation. Like, just that moment of hesitation to make the race win. Yeah, a little bit of stalemate. Yeah, totally. You know, due to the nature of this course, where it was legitimately rolling, you know, like, I was able to use, like, my low CDA on the fast parts, and then, like, my Waspichilo on the climbing parts, and, you know, really hold a good, and then, of course, just, like, my own knowledge of how to pace, like, you know, I'm pretty decent at T-team in general, even though I'm a small guy, you know, just being able to, like, pace myself correctly for optimal speed. That helped a lot too, right? And that's exactly what happened. And then, you know, one thing that I was doing that, again, I don't know if people even think about doing this or actually do this, due to the nature of like, you know, it's an outback, you can see your competition when you're going like one way and they're still going the other way. What I would do is I just like use my computer's lap function, pick out a point like just before the the 180, like a tree or a sign, and hit lap. And then when I hit that 180, and when I saw them coming to that point, I'd look at my computer and be like, okay, I have 30 seconds, or I have 40, or whatever, right? And then that would just give me a guide as to how big or small my gap is getting, right? And again, like, I don't know if people even think about doing this, but like, I do it often, even in a crit, right? Like, if I see, like, a breakaway up the road, and I see them take a turn, I'll hit lap. and then I'll see how long it takes us to get to that turn. And I'll be like, okay, they only have six seconds. It's not critical. It looks a lot bigger than what it really is. I do that a lot when I miss a move or I think maybe a move is dangerous, but it might not be just because the gap is less than 10 seconds. Yeah, and I think also one of the things about this Road Race that really sticks out to me, not only because you read the race right, but because one of the things about your training, I think, that we should probably discuss a little bit, is that your endurance got so much better, well, according to all my data, anyway, in your racing, it got a lot better once we started working together, because When we started, you had been doing polarized only for two years or something like that. It was just easy or three or four by eight, and that was it. And then looking at the first hour of this race, the whole race is about two hours. And so the first, while you were in the bunch, the first hour 15, you had normalized. a little under your threshold, but your normalized power was 270 for this. And I think that's something to consider is not only the impact of repeated efforts and the type of training that you're doing, because it didn't seem like you were really getting a lot of that kind of adaptation to do this with just strictly 3x8s and easy endurance, but also Shit, I forgot where I was going with that. I think, you go ahead. Oh, no, you go ahead, because I was still grabbing for sure. I think what you were getting at is maybe, like, in terms of the training, like, my FTP wasn't necessarily increasing, but one thing that was, was, like, the endurance, or, like, your words, I remember, is, like, the depth. I had more depth, and I think what that really translates to is, like, Extending my TTE, like, sure, maybe my FTP wasn't, like, going up as much as I wished it would, but, you know, I could hold my FTP for a lot longer than I thought maybe I ever could. And I think that that was what we saw in races. But it took a bit to, like, kind of understand how to really utilize that, I guess, in terms of, like, race tactics as well. Yeah, well, and so let's look at the normalized power for the first hour 15 versus the last like 40 minutes. So normalized power for the first hour 15 is like 270-ish, right? For the last 40 minutes, it's 285. And so how many people listening could normalize about like 95% of their FTP for over an hour? and then go right to their FTP for the last, for another 40 minutes, like for normalized power, like doing like a two, two, three-ish minute climb repeatedly. I don't know. Maybe Chris can do that quite easily. I'm told that Chris can hold their sweet spot for three or four hours or something ridiculous like that. But, you know, I think that that just speaks to, I guess, it's like my strengths as a athlete. But also, you know, I was making, I remember that day, I was like making sure to like. Fuel, a lot. Yeah, you said you were doing a 40-gram gel every 20 minutes in your notes. Yeah, yeah, yeah, so what, that's 120 grams per hour, and I remember, like, in the beginning of the race, when, like, sure, it was hard, but, like, I wasn't necessarily doing anything, like, to make it hard, like, and then there was definitely times where the race was, like, super slow, because, like, those cinch guys were like, ah, fuck, we're not gonna shake these guys, and, like, the race would just get really slow, and, like, I'm like, oh, screw it, still gonna continue to fuel. I think there was like kind of those two aspects where, you know, I was working with, I was working within myself, but also just also, you know, making sure I was fueled for the later parts of the race. And for context, I mean, I know you kind of said it, but just to make sure it's clear, when I attacked, I ended up soloing for about 40 minutes. Yeah. And that brought you to the line. And, and I remember the picture from that. It was a, it like, You know, it doesn't, you know, a win's a win, but it was getting to be a near-run thing. Like, they were closing on you in the last even couple meters. Yeah, I won by, like, a wheel length, maybe, or half a wheel length. It was crazy, because, like, I could, you know, in the last lap, at the last, you know, like, a stretch of road, like, again, in this particular course, like, you can just see, like, almost forever. And I could sense that, like, you know, everyone was working together now to chase me down because they realized, like, they kind of fucked up, right? And so they were legitimately chasing me. And I remember, like, the last hill, Jesus Christ, like, that's, like, the worst, arguably the worst hill on the course that I don't think a lot of people realize. It's, you know, steep, it's short, but it's just like, I just saw that hill. I'm like, all right, I need to throw everything I have to this hill and carry over a little bit of speed because after that, it's slightly downhill. And then also the road kind of curves to the left, right? And then of course, you know, trying to abide by the center line rule, I'm like, I'm going to take the shortest line, right? Yeah, like an F1 driver, just like, I'm going to take a piece of string and pull it right through the course and make it tight, and that's my line. I was definitely taking the racing line, and then like, you know, realizing that they were kind of coming up on me, and like, if you can imagine. Riding at your FTP for like 40 minutes, and then trying to like get out of the saddle and sprint, it's like your legs are just kind of jello, but I still just kind of force myself to do so, and yeah, I made sure I pedaled all the way to the line. I think like if I had even attempted to celebrate, like that would have been it. Like that's how close that race was. Yeah, don't... Don't ever celebrate. Unless you look back and you know that you have clear road, which is why you see that in the pro races all the time. They look back just to double check before they post up if they're like out in top finished. It doesn't matter who it is. Well, sometimes there's a little bit of hubris on the line, so to speak. Yeah. So to kind of go through your list of tips for folks on this, We kind of talked about positioning with the Florida race, but I think let's talk about aero a little bit because one of your tips here is it's okay to buy speed. And granted, if you have the resources to buy speed, granted that it's like a one-time upgrade, but it's an upgrade that lasts as long as you've got that equipment or that position or something like that. So have you ever done aero testing for yourself on your road bike? Or was it just like, you know, evade helmet, skin suit, like, you know, get small, et cetera, et cetera? Yeah, and like in Florida, I was like one of the first people, one of the first people to just always wear a skin suit in a race, right? I started kind of like just doing that all the time. And I did that, of course, because it's fast, but I also just found skin suit to be more comfortable racing too. What year was that, by the way, like 2010-ish? Earlier? I do. Yeah, I want to say 20, yeah, actually, you're right, 2010, because that's when I moved back from New York to South Florida, so 2010 to 2014. And that's what I remember, skin suits starting to be a thing, because I remember before that, everybody's wearing a really baggy-ass kit, probably from Champsys or something like that, Club Cut, because it's affordable, and it's like, who cares, just draft, like, it doesn't matter, and it turns out, it can matter quite a bit. Sure, yeah. You know, at the time I was riding also like an aero, one of the first-ish aero road bikes, like that's kind of like when, you know, I think Cervelo came out with their, I think their soloist, I was riding like this. Yeah, the S1. Yeah, the Lightspeed actually made a carbon bicycle and it was aero road and looking back on it, like it actually was pretty decent in terms of it being a fast bike, but you know, regardless, before all those things, I mean, I say like, yeah, by speed. I'll go to that in a moment, like, what I mean by that, but, like, the first thing you need to tackle is your position. I know several guys out here who, like, can throw down watts, but on a flat road, they're just a sale. Guilty. I don't tell them. Yeah, I don't tell them these things, right? Like, I'm like, all right, cool, I'm going to draft you, and when you draft me, it's going to be really difficult. That's very true. You know, I mean, there's guys, there's been guys who tell me, they're like, GC, I hate drafting you. And I'm like, good. Why would I want to make a race easier for you, right? But yeah, just kind of like hone that, like just like punch a small hole through the wind, right? Think of it that way, right? And that's kind of like what you're really thinking about is your frontal area. Like really like concentrating in that, you know, ride the hoods, 90 degree elbows, put your head down, right? So many guys just kind of crane their neck and their heads just like sticking out. Your head's arguably one of, like, the worst aerodynamic shapes out there, right? Like, you're just wasting so many watts. You know, flattish back. Like, those things are, like, things, like, you should really, like, think about. You know, maybe go to a bike fitter and see what you can do. Maybe get a shorter crank arm or whatever. You know, narrow bars, stuff like that. But honestly, the biggest upgrade that one can do for themselves is, like, deep wheels. So many guys are still, like, hung up on weight. They're like, no, I want to ride 30 mil wheels because they're lighter. And if you really do the math between, like, a 30 mil to a 50, 60 mil, it's like, you're saving, like, 200 grams, which is, like, half a pound. It's like, do you really think that half a pound is actually doing you that much of a difference? You know, I use, there's, like, websites out there that can, like, calculate, like, how fast you can go up a climb or a certain segment or whatever, and it's like, the difference, there's a local Dick Measuring Klein out here called Flagstaff. It's like, you know, when I punch in my numbers and I increase my weight by one pound, the difference is like, I think, 10, 20 seconds? Like, it's not a lot. Like, you would think it'd be like minutes. It's like, no, you're just talking about seconds. But if you increase your, yeah, if you increase your aerodynamic efficiency or reduce your drag, I'm sure it's probably double that at least. Yeah, I mean, like, I don't have that metric off the top of my head, but, you know, even on that climb, there's, it's like an average is like 6-7%, and like, you know, I think the top time is like anywhere, like, it's like 12-ish minutes, but like, honestly, if you're doing like 14 or less, like, you're going really good. But even on that climb, there's like parts where you kind of gain speed. Yes, you're still climbing, but you're going over 15 miles an hour at points, and it's like, you know, I think aerodynamics really... comes into play at anything more than 13 miles per hour, right? And that's why, like, when you see, like, pros, like, climbing, they're all drafting each other, and you're like, are they really getting any benefits? Like, the way they're climbing? Yes. Oh, yeah. They're going, they're actually going quite fast. Yeah, they're going, like, yeah, yeah, 15, 18 miles an hour or faster up some pretty, you know, and granted, like, a lot of the slopes there, like, are, yeah. You know, in the tour and stuff like that, they're using a lot of the main roads, and the main roads have certain gradients that they're allowed to be a maximum at, except for hairpins, and so, yeah, so like they're like 6%, 5%, 4%, they're capable of going extremely quickly uphill, for sure, and aero matters a ton, and that's why, exactly why you see, like, mountain trains, because you really do get a draft. Yeah, yeah, you really get a sense of it, like, when they take a hairpin, and they're, like, having to coast through the turn. You're like, oh, you're actually going kind of fast. Yeah, if you've got a break for a hairpin going uphill, you're flying. So, let's see. So, tell me about, let's see, we could, you want to talk about, you know, reconning courses, or you want to talk about reconning people? Well, I mean, it's a little bit of both. It's like the different size of the same coin. I remember you had asked me, I think over the phone last season, you're like, do you ever get the sense that you take this shit too seriously? And I laugh, I'm like, yes. But, you know, it matters. Like, if racing... If you care about racing and you care about how you do in races, then like, yeah, it fucking matters, right? You know, it's a thing that you want to get better at, so like, why not take it a little bit more seriously? You know, like, I remember, you know, I had my own team and I would, I created like a team, Slack. I love Slack. Shout out to Slack. And I would start talking about like the wind and the course and like, you know, the people and like some guys would be like, oh God, I'm leaving this channel. I'm like, there's a reason why, like, granted, like, I'll be, disclaimer, like, I don't, I mean, it's true of most cyclists, I think, like, I don't win a lot of races, but, like, I'm like, what I did tell them is, like, listen, I'm, I do better than you in a race. Why do you think that is? Right? And it's just like, because I think about these things. So, like, reconning a course, like, if you're able to ride the course, you know, like, if it's, like, within driving distance or riding distance, then, like, Do it. You know, I got called out by one friend a couple years ago about, like, reconning, like, a TT course that, honestly, it's like a training. It's a road that I would train on often. It's so close by me. It's like I could get there, like, in 30, 40 minutes. And he's like, why are you reconning a course that you'd ride on all the time? I'm like, because I'm not thinking about it in terms of racing, right? Like, I may be doing an interval or just, like, endurance. I'm just riding. I'm just, like, enjoying the weather or whatever, the scenery. Like, I'm, my mindset is different when I ride something in terms of, like, reconning it, right? I'm, like, thinking about, you know, oh, what's the, oh, there's a bunch of cracks here, or, you know, oh, what happens if the wind comes this way? Or, you know, like, just thinking about what you're riding on in a different mindset, and I think that's important. Yeah, so, like, learning the course, learning the gradients, learning the sight lines, learning the wind, and so that's where, you know, stuff like, like, whatever those, the Winsock apps and stuff like that, like they can tell you or predict the win for the day and like, and that can make a big difference too, as opposed to like, you know, if you, if you, you know, it's like if, like, like in Belgium, like, you know, there's, you know, there's a ton of roads because, you know, people have been living there for thousands of years, but also when you, when you race it, there's, there's, everybody knows the roads already. And they've raced those roads probably since they were juniors, which is why, you know, they have the racing mindset when it comes to actually getting into the world tour and racing on your quote-unquote home roads. Because it's not like, oh, yeah, I know how to train this. I know how long it takes me to get up this climb. It's not only that. It's like you've raced up this climb a bunch already. And you're right. The mindset is totally different. Totally. And, yeah, like using those kinds of apps, you know, one thing I think. Not a lot of people realize. It's like, you know, like, sure, knowing the direction of the wind is important. But then also, it's less about knowing the direction, but like knowing how that would influence a race. And what I mean by that is like, for example, if you see a, you know, imagine just like an imaginary box, right? And the wind is a crosswind on one section, but then when you turn, all of a sudden it's a tailwind, right? That's a critical part of the course. Right, because it's going to be difficult in a crosswind, and if there's a gap that opens up, as soon as you hit that tailwind, that gap is, I mean, depending on how strong the wind is, is going to be kind of impossible to close, right? Because, like, the relationship between speed and power is, like, huge, right? It's like, you know, if all of a sudden, you know, as soon as you make that right-hand turn and the group is going 35, 40 miles an hour, like, try to think about what kind of watts you need to do in order to close that. It's kind of impossible. Right, and kind of thinking back on that race I won in Florida, it's like, I didn't think about it that way, like, I know more now, right, in terms of, like, you know, relationship between speed and power, but I just realized, I'm like, well, you know, as soon as you make this turn with the crosswind after this tailwind, like, things are going to get really, like, fucked, and I need to be, I just need to put myself in a position to minimize that, like, hurt, right? But again, yeah, I think people are just kind of like... Shut Off Their Brain Sometimes, or maybe just don't think about these things. You have complained to me about that many times, about like, oh my god, why did this guy not read the race? Because it seems to me, based on a lot of our conversations, and granted, this is your experience, et cetera, et cetera, but it seems like a lot of people will mentally check out. After, like, 30-40 minutes of racing, like, a move's gone up the road, something like that, and then when the move gets brought back, like, they don't know what to do. It's like everybody knows the opening chest move, but, you know, you don't know what it's like to, you know, I mean, how often do you get to experience, you know, having to continue racing and, like, keeping that mental focus after an hour, hour and a half of, you know, some not easy pedaling on the bike with a bunch of other... People. Yeah. Yeah, I think it's like, I mean, there's a saying is like the race isn't over until it's over, you know, like there may be a break up the road and you're like, ah, fuck. But I mean, like, you could still create a chase group and still get a top 10 or you create a chase group and now you guys work really well together because you're not fighting for the win and now all of a sudden you actually catch the breakaway and now you're in the, now you're in a position to actually race or win the race. Right, but I think a lot of people, just like you said, kind of like mentally check out. Yeah, actually, I did a quick mental calculation, speaking of mentally checking out, because I have a hard time mentally checking out of anything, so I was thinking, you just said you didn't win a lot, and I was just thinking, who's like a killer on the bike? Like, let's look at Cavendish's tour record. 30, what, 4 wins, right? and he's, let's, I don't know exactly how many tours he started, let's estimate it's 10. He's, he's done 210 tour stages and he's won 34 of them and that's a killer, like, you're not even batting 300 at that point. No, I know, I mean, like, it's, it's a perception thing, right, where, I mean, it's the same, like, you always lose, you always, you will always lose more races than you win. But, you know, I think I just, I kind of just wanted to throw out the disclaimer just because they're like, well, why the hell should we listen to you? If you guys look me up on roadresults.com and you're like, meh, right? But again, like, you know, winning is not the only measure of success. Like, I have a ton of top tens, top fives, even a few podiums, right? You know, it's just like that extra one or two percent that may be missing to actually win a race, right? I mean, those things are frustrating, of course, but like still, you know, it just depends on your measure of what you, your measurement of success, right? Like if it's strictly winning, then you're going to be disappointed a lot of the time, right? I had a coach who once said that bike racing is not a sport about winning, it's a sport about managing disappointment. And I think I've said that in the podcast before. Yeah, probably like five times. Yeah. But it's, it's so fucking true. Wait, hold on. You missed the second thing you always say. Oh, yeah. That's why the French love it. Yeah, that's why the French love it. Yeah. Yeah, man, boy, those words will live in for me. Thanks, Nat. Yeah. But I think... Yeah, go ahead. Well, now my train of thought has been derailed, so... Sorry, no, I was going to tackle the learning your competition, because I think... Oh, yeah, because I was going to say, like, looking at road results and... You know, that's a good way to recon the other people or because especially if you haven't raced them a lot before, it's looking at the kind of courses that they're good at, etc, etc. Like, these are the kinds of things that can help a lot when it comes to thinking, okay, this, this guy might be a little punchy, this guy might be really good in a break, maybe I should follow his wheel or etc, etc. Yeah, totally. You know, learning your competition, like there's There's so many resources out there to kind of stock your competition, but good and bad, I guess, right? There's roadresults.com, there's Strava, right? If they especially have their account profile public, and then there's swiftpower.com if they're erasers or just use Zwift regularly. because it was with power.com actually, actually shows you their power profile. It's like the numbers are right there for you to look at, right? So you don't have to do anything. Well, assuming that the indoors reflects the outdoors to some degree. True, true. Yeah, but at least it will give you, it will give you an indication on what this person like good has. Yeah. You know what I mean? Like if they're like five, 20 minute, um, watts per kilo is like insane, but like they're. what, five and one minute is like, shit, you're like, okay, this guy's really gonna, this guy's gonna be great for a breakaway, and I can probably beat him in a sprint, right? Yeah, I'm also assuming that their weight is input correctly. Uh, yeah, I mean, yeah, I don't want to get into that, but yeah, for sure. Um, you know, and oftentimes I would like, if I'm going to a race where, I mean, at Masters, Masters, um, you know, where I'm like, I don't know who I'm going to be racing against. Um, you know, look at, look at their Strava, look at their road results, see, see how, How they've been doing locally, right? Like, have they been winning? Like, does that, you know, like, that would probably indicate they're, like, on good form. You know, looking at Strava and kind of going back, you know, a month or two or maybe even three because, I mean, like, what they were doing past three months, like, maybe won't matter in terms of, like, the races coming up and, like, seeing, like, have they been doing volume? Like, what have they been doing? Like, oh, it's just a bunch of group rides or, like, you know, I remember for this past national was out in Augusta. versus this guy from Wisconsin. He won his state road race. I'm like, shit. And then when I looked at the Strava file, because that was public, the road race looked exactly like the course in Augusta. I'm like, shit. I need to look, I need to be watching this dude, right? Because it was just like this rolly road race, you know, it was like there was basically never flat, and it was more or less the same distance. I'm like, I'm like, shit, like this guy might be dangerous. I have no idea who this guy is, but I should probably put him on my radar, right? And then of course, like people would just kind of love, you know, showing everything on social media, right? Like never really hiding anything. And it's like, he posted pictures in Strava and I know exactly how his kit looked and I know what bike he was riding. So I'm like, great. I have no idea who this guy is, but I know exactly who he is on the start line. Sure enough, like on the start line, he was wearing like his bright pink and blue kit. I'm like, boom, there you go. I know who you are. If he's listening, you got stalked. Yeah. You got stalked hard. I mean, I know some, I know a bunch of young bike racers too, and actually some of them are, some of them think it's really creepy the level to which more experienced bike racers stalk others. But most people listening to this will be like, oh yeah, we all do that. We know that we do that. Especially if you're in a position to go well at a big race like Masters Nats or something like that. Yeah, I mean, I guess. I totally get the sense that it's, like, kind of creepy and stalkerish, but, like, that is there. You know, why not use it, right? Like, I think if there is Strava and their, yeah, their Strava's public, like, start clicking around. Like, who cares, right? Give them kudos. Hey, you look pretty strong. We're about to race the Masters Nats. Good luck. Yeah, for sure. It's funny, I have, I remember last year at Albuquerque, you know, oh, in terms of, like, stalking people, I mean, like, look at the fucking, look at people who, who's registering, and that's how you kind of, like, start to, you know, do your, do your homework, so to speak. I remember, like, this random guy from, like, California that, like, registered, I'm like, who, I'm like, who is this guy? And I started looking him up, and then I, and then I realized he's, like, from NorCal. And then I started looking at rides, and then, like, he wrote, oh, this is, yeah, here's, like, another great example of, like, why you should do this. He rode with someone that I know who lives here, right? And the guy who lives here is originally from Norcap. So I'm, like, I hit him up on Instagram, like, hey, what do you know about this guy? And he's, like, he just, like, replied, like, lol. He's, like, he asked me the same thing about you. And I'm, like, perfect. You know. So. and then I went back to his shop and I'm like, kudos. I'm like, yes, we're stalking each other. Oh man, that's sort of like in high school when you find out that your crush has a crush on you too. You're like, oh my god! You too. Oh my god, I've been admiring you for so long. And, yeah, that's, honestly, I think that's really adorable. And then, like, and then, you know, you race each other, and then afterwards you get to hang out and be like, man, good race. Totally, yeah. I mean, cycling is, like, amazing just because of, like, the social aspect of things. And, like, bike racing is, like, I mean, like, it's a chess game. It's, like, war, right? But, like, afterwards you just kind of, like, you know, hang out and, like... Discuss, like, oh, I was thinking this, or, like, you know, like, kind of like this, you know, you just really talk about, like, what was going on through your mind, and, like, laugh about things, and, you know, it's a really, like, good feeling afterwards, where you can just, like, just relax, finally, and, like, you know, get to know the people who, get to know the people from a not-edity perspective, right? I remember, like, I think I've told you this, and I've said it to many people, I'm like, there's no friends in bike racing. Like, the only friends you have is, like, your fucking teammates, right? Although, it's not entirely true. Just because, like, I think it's important to state now, just because it's a segway, it's like, there's a lot of backdoor deals. Yeah, Greg Lamond, how are all of your teammates in bike racing? Are they all friends? Right, yeah. Yeah, there's a local team out here that has, like, it's a club, but I mean, like, they show up to two bike races with, like, ten guys deep. and I know a guy in that team and he's told me like, yeah, we really don't like each other. I'm like, it shows. You guys don't race well as a team at all. Yeah, you race like a pack of cats. That's awesome. Well, and actually, you know what? Going back to something else that you said where I had asked you if you're taking things too seriously. Honestly, I think I remember asking you that. But one of the reasons I asked that It wasn't even having anything to do with competition. It was actually more about training. And I think I was getting the sense that you were spending a lot of mental and nervous energy on this recon stuff. And I was honestly worried it was starting to affect your recovery from the training. Yeah, I think you had dispelled my fears at that point. I think also because it's impossible to keep up this level of recon for as long as you've been bike racing or as long as the tools have existed from 2008 or 2009 or something like that. When was the first road results? And even before that, the USA Cycling results, which have hopefully been up longer, although the database is, who knows, but like, I was thinking one of the things that is impossible to do for a long time with a really detrimental amount of energy investment, or, well, what did I just say? It's impossible to do this for a long time without a detrimental, or with a detrimental amount of energy investment. Like, if you were going to burn out because of overly obsessing about this stuff, It would have happened by now, but I certainly know a lot of folks who have gotten to that level of obsession, and it really does have a massive effect, a detrimental effect on the training and the recovery. Yeah, I mean, you know, I just, I don't know if that's necessarily true of me, maybe it is. You know, I think, uh, cyclists are horrible at, like, self-fletching, right? We'll ride ourselves to the ground and be like, I must do more, I'm sucking, I must be doing, I need to do more training instead of, like, wrestling, for example. Yeah, that's a big one. I kind of just viewed these things as just, like, part of the game, right? And, like, that's why it's, I still find it interesting and fun. And, like I said, I've been racing for 20 plus years and, like, I've known so many guys who, like, come into racing and just, like, burn out because I think that they didn't They loved the results, or that, yeah, they loved the results more than they loved the process, and the process is, like, fucking everything, it's the training, it's the recovery, it's the doing the core, doing strength, and, you know, like, being intentional, like, learning how to bike race, like, all these, like, little, little things, like, and I'm like, I know guys who were really good, or strong, and, like, had potential, maybe not to go pro, but, like, yeah, potential to, like, Win Locally, or go, you know, travel somewhere in the nation, get, like, a solid, like, top 20 at some, like, NRT crate or something like that, you know, like, good dudes who just kind of, like, burn out, and I always, like, wonder, like, why? And, you know, it's funny, I think about a friend of mine who now lives in LA, we're hanging out one day, he's like, he's like, GC, he's like, you're gifted, right? And I'm like, he was talking about cycling, right? And I'm like, No, I'm not, right? Because, I mean, like, at least for me, like, gifted just meant, like, you had incredible parents and, you know, your VO2 max is, like, above 80 or what have you. Yeah, on the couch, it's above 80. Yeah, exactly. I'm like, no, it's not. And I'm like, what you see now, like, what you see now is just, like, years of hard work and just, like, sticking through it. And then he said, that's your gift. And I was just like, like, holy shit, like, mind blown, like, just being able to reframe. like my own mindset of what it means to be successful, really, right? Yeah, well, and that's one of the things that I noticed about you initially, and that where I was like, we're going to work well together, because you have this constant process of observing, and like, you've got the feedback loop when it comes to, like, you know, racing and pretty much everything. And you know, like you even had that feedback loop about whether you wanted to focus more on time trials, because you're really aero, you know, you don't have a ton of power, but you've had some really solid results at like Masters, NADs, and even locally in time trials, and you're like, You know, the investment of time, and et cetera, et cetera, it's just not worth it for me. And so like, there's that process again. And it's like, it's like, you're always like honing exactly what matters to you, which I think is a really big thing. And also kind of knowing yourself, it's like, it's like, as we get older and anything, a lot of the process of learning anything is what Appeals to Me, like what am I good at and what do I like? And that's where I think a lot of folks have a difficult time, especially in racing, in training, where whatever you're doing isn't working and having a good amount of honest self-reflection is really difficult to achieve, if not impossible. And I would say that if anybody out there is like a therapist or a psychologist or a psychiatrist, you could make a killing doing this for bike racers only. Oh, man. Yeah. That's a great fucking point, because, like, I coach a few people, and, like, sometimes, like, one thing I would tell them is, like, hey, if you're not having fun, if you're not having fun anymore, then stop doing it. Right? No one's holding a gun to your head. You know, we aren't pros, right? This isn't your livelihood. You're doing it because you find it fun. If you're not finding it fun anymore, then just stop doing it, right? Like, I think too many people, even, I mean, I see it here, like, locally, where I know due to race bikes and, and like, and I hear them talk about how the race win or, like, maybe read their Strava posts or their Instagram posts. I'm just like, I'm like, wow, like, you hate bike racing and you don't realize it. I don't tell them this, right? You know, but it's like they're doing it because like all their friends are doing it or like that's what they see, you know, yeah, like it's like the kind of like social pressure to do that. It's just like, you know, I don't, I love bike racing, but I love riding my bike more, right, more than anything, right? You know, I would be happy as a clam if the weather was nice enough to do this year-round, like there's like a three, three and a half hour loop that I can do right up to Left-Hand Canyon, go peak-to-peak, peak-to-peak is like this, people on the East Coast who have ever done Blue Ridge Parkway, it's basically that, but you're like at 8,000 feet. I was actually going to say, like, you know, Virginia, North Carolina, you can do this year-round. Yeah, yeah, like, you go up there, and you're like, it's amazing, you're, you can see the Conehill Divine, there's like the mountains, there's the trees, you might see some wildlife, I remember I saw a moose one day, you know, it's like, it's amazing, and then like, you go downhill, and like, you're blasting downhills at like 40 plus, you're like, this is... Great. Like, for me, if I could just do that every day and not race another day in the bike, I wouldn't care. Right? Yeah. So, yeah, I mean, I think, you know, I think you kind of touched on something important, which is the social aspect of things. And I, and also, you know, this kind of goes with knowing yourself. Because now that you are, you know, somewhat retired from bike racing, or at least you're definitely, you're definitely stepping back from really serious bike racing. You know that it matters to you that it's enjoyable, that you go out and do it. I also think that at some level, a lot of people who ride a lot, if we stopped training or just moving around or doing anything, we would turn into absolute basket cases that our loved ones would absolutely hate. For sure. Yeah, I mean, I think it... At least for me, like my own, I'm speaking for myself here, I think it brought a really bullish down, so it's just like, exercise equals endorphins, right? And like, once we stop doing that for any length of time, they're like, you know, like you get on edge and you don't quite realize, you can't quite put your finger on what that is, and maybe it's just that, right? It's just like, your body's just like, oh, we need like these feel-good things, and you stop doing it, why? Right? And then, you know, kind of like, when you take a break in the off-season, right? And like, what I would tell people, it's like, like, take a week, take two weeks. Fuck it, take a month. Just get back to me when you feel that itch, right? Because it's going to hit you, you know? Yeah. Yeah. The motivation is a big one. And especially if you've been training really hard. And, you know, not to harp too much on the training thing, but honestly, I see a lot of people training way too hard and too often and without taking a break for years and years and years. And it's so incredible to me that Nobody thinks, oh, I should probably rest, because everybody's afraid of losing their fitness. Seriously, it's like Bilbo trying to hang on to the ring. I made that meme maybe a year ago. It's like, after all, why shouldn't I keep it? The fitness security blanket. I think he said it in one podcast. I loved when you said that. I was just like, oh, yes. Yeah. Yeah, I mean, again, I think it's just like, you realize how hard you have to work to get fitness and then how easy it is to lose it, right? But I think it's important to kind of step back and let your body recover so that you can make another build or get to a new level, right? You can't be the always thick guy, right? Because you're never peaked. I feel like dieting is the same way. Where if you, you know, if you diet way too hard, way too fast, you have the world's worst rebound. And it's sort of like training way too hard, right? When you get in from off season, like, oh, I got to get all my fitness back within two weeks. Like you're screwed if you try that. Absolutely screwed. Yeah. Yeah. So, um, Anyway, we've got a couple more points to touch on before we get to listener questions, which you have not heard yet. And so I'm really, really excited to get to those with you. So why don't we talk about a couple points that we can learn from two more races. So why don't we talk about the crit where you missed the break? Because I think we had been working together for maybe like six months or eight months or maybe even a year at that point. And so, yeah, describe. that day for me. Yeah, so that's a great, that's a great, um, one to bring up, um, because, like, that's kind of, I think, when we realize, or when, after the fact, I realized, like, yeah, maybe my FTP wasn't up, but, like, my depth of fitness was up, right? And, like, basically what happened was, you know, like, what I lose earlier, where, like, I have, like, this, like, spidey sense of, like, when to go, or when. When the race was, like, getting hard, like, okay, now I need to make moves. And for context, what you had said to me, like, in the notes of that race, you had said, I didn't feel that tired at that point, when the brakes stuck, because that was apparently your internal monitor of, oh, I'm kind of this fatigued, so something's going to stick now, and suddenly your gauge, like, the ceiling of that gauge had moved up quite a bit, and you were like, how come I'm not, you know, getting into the, you know. Getting to this, like, little bit more fatigue. I feel fine. How come everybody else is tired enough to, like, miss the break? Yeah, yeah. So, you know, to touch upon that real quick, it's like, you know, when you're tired, more likely than not, like, everyone else is tired, and, like, those are probably the best times to attack, right? Because, like, they'll see you go off, and they're like, fuck, so-and-so must be feeling, like, godlike, and I can't do anything about that right now. Right, and again, like I said earlier, it's just like that moment of hesitation is like how you make that race when you move. But yeah, totally, it's like I think one thing, again, like we talk in terms of like fitness, like raising FTP, but like I wasn't like when we were working together, like we really didn't see that, but what I guess I didn't really see is like my ability to like work longer at FTP or maybe just slightly below it. And so like when that happened, I saw this move and I'm like, yeah. That looks okay, but, like, it's still, like, the race hasn't been hard yet, right? We're gonna bring it back. And then when I realized, like, the race, the move was gone, I'm like, oh, fuck. And, like, I just had to kill myself to, like, try to bring it back, but there were teammates in the group, you know, the guys who were up the road had teammates in the group, and, like, they just would not let me go. And I think in that crit, like, I even threw down, like, one in, like, my... Top One Minute Powers on this little roller that I'm just like, okay, I'm going to go all in and just try to do something. And I couldn't, right? Everyone else is just like, well, we're not going to let you get up there. And that was it. And that was extremely frustrating to me. And I'm going to hate what I'm going to give away here because it was such a godsend when you suggested this. You suggested to put... my norm power on my computer screen, right? And for contacts, like, you know, I've been doing this for so long, like, sometimes people see my Wahoo, whatever, and they're like, like, why do you have, like, nine data fields? I'm like, do you really look at all those things at the same time? I'm like, you should see the other pages, you know? Right? And I put, I have, like, a race screen. and I put norm power and then like that was such a game changer because like for me I had to like like you said like I had to readjust that gauge and like like I wasn't attuned with it anymore right like I kind of like lost that because like the fitness the depth of fitness increased but like having a norm power there I'm like okay like you know the race will start off there'll be attacks I follow whatever and like the norm powers start going up slowly slowly slowly and then as soon as they kind of like hit around my FTP whether or not I felt tired of that. I'm like, okay, now the race, something's going to happen, right? And that might be like 10 minutes into a race or 20 minutes into a race. I'm just like looking at a number. I'm like, okay, now I need to pay attention or now I need to make a move. And that was such, that was so helpful. But I don't think that hurts to give away because, well, you're stepping back from that level of seriousness in racing, but also that's very specific to you. because a lot of folks like, you know, in a crit, like if it had been that hard for that long, I would be normalizing well over my FTP or depending on the course, it's like under. And so you've actually got to adjust based on the day. And so, so, you know, it's like, that's something that can work for, that's definitely working for you, but whether it works for somebody else, like, you know, you've got to try it and find out. That's fair. Yeah. Yeah. But for me, it was just like, Kind of like this thing I had in my back pocket for so long that, yeah, it just kind of hurts to give that away, whether or not it helps you. I think it was your secret sauce to the point where it was really a good metric for you, where I think a lot of folks would be better off actually learning the body language of other racers. Like looking if they're tired, like watching their breathing, you know, are they staring at their stem instead of looking up at the corner or watching their front wheel? Like these are also things that can tell you how hard the race has been without, you know, having to use any of your internal gauges. Yeah, so a great segue into just reading body language. Again, I don't think people... I've been, like, racing for so long that, like, I've come to realize in just discussions with people or people I coach that, like, I just, like, I think at a higher level than people, right? And, like, reading body language, I don't know that people do this, right? Well, I would say it's not a higher level, but I think you think more steps beyond. You know, it's like when I play chess, I'm thinking, like, three moves down the line where somebody else is, like, already thinking about the endgame. Yeah. Yeah. So, like, reading body language. or, like, legitimately, like, listening to how people are breathing, like, I do that in a race, like, all the time, right? And, like, I remember, like, you know, just like you said, like, you know, shoulders rocking or hips rocking or, like, how they're even gripping the bar, like, are they tightening their shoes? Did they just take a swig of water, right, like, before a hill, you know, like, like, these, like, little things, like, these little things, these, these tells, right, like, for people who play, like, poker. Right? Like, people have tails. Right? And, like, racing locally with the same people over and over again, I think it's important to just, like, learn people's tails. Right? And, and I know, I'm sure I have one. I think I know which, I think I know what my tail is, but, like, I can't help it just because I'm thinking, like, a million miles an hour in a race. I think my tail is, like, constantly looking behind me. The sign of, you know, the sign of glory. Exactly. But, like, you know, and again, like, even listening to people breathing, like, and comparing it to how you're breathing, like, I often do that, where, like, maybe we just went up a hill, or we just chased back and attacked, I'd, like, ride next to, like, whoever's, like, next to me, or whatever, like, I could hear them breathing, and, like, if their rate of breathing is higher than mine, I'm like, okay, like, they're more tired than me, right? Or maybe I'm just fitter than them. But, like, again, like, that knowledge is is key, right? Because then you can use that later on in the race, right? You're like, okay, so-and-so is tired. I may not necessarily need to worry about them. Or if they just so happen to find, if they're in the front, it might be a good time to attack because they can't do anything about it. You know, I remember this past Nationals, I forget his name, the guy who won the TT and ended up coming second in the road race. He won the TT convincing me, right? And it was like this dude from New York, like this massive guy. Massive guy in terms of cycling, right? Especially compared to being like 140 and I'm like 5'7 for context. You know, I, in the road race, I'm like, okay, you can TT like a monster. I am looking at him on the road bike. He's like very aero-optimized on the road bike. If a move were to get away, he's not going to miss it, right? That was the gamble I made. And I literally just rode behind him the entire road race, right? And it's funny, He wrote this blog post after the TT, and I read it, and I realized he was another vet in the sport. He's been in the sport for a long time. And so I was drafting him, or I was just behind him in the back of the road race, and then I would just shadow him, shadow him. And that's another thing that people should do. Find the local guy who's always doing well. Shadow them. Forget about your... I was just shadowing him in this road race, and he noticed me very early on. Of course he did. He was looking back, and then he'd see me, and then he moved to another part of the group, and then he'd look back and see me, and I'm like, ah, shit, my cover's blown. And there was a break up the road, and my teammate, He rolled back to the back of the group where I was with this dude, and he's like, there's a move up the road. There's a long, strong guy. It's like, that's a dangerous move. You need to do something about it. And I'm like, I'm like, I just saw him like, I know what I'm doing. Leave me alone. And then sure enough, so I guess it's just like all rollers. I'm looking at this guy. I wish I could remember his name. He, I see him gripping his bars like tighter. Right, or like, he took a swig of water, and then all of a sudden, I see, like, grip his bars tighter, right? And I'm like, oh, he's gonna attack, right? And then sure enough, using the speed of the downhill, coming up to the uphill, he just attacks, and like, because I just knew it was gonna happen, it was like, and plus, like, he's a massive dude, so he gave me a great draft, I was able to follow him. And sure enough, we bridge up to, like, the move, and granted, like, that move didn't materialize to anything, but I was just like, like... I was like, LOL, like, you know, I just read that right, right, but no one else did, because, like, it was only me and him that rejected that group. Yeah, well, actually, speaking of NAS, let's talk about the year before, because I think that was one of the spots, you know, for your bike racing career, where your level of focus actually did you a disservice. Yeah, yeah. So, for context, again, this is Metro Nationals in Albuquerque. I was in the race when he moved with two other guys. One guy from California who I had no clue who he was, and then this guy from South Florida who I knew of, but he kind of started coming up in racing and results in South Florida after I left, after I moved away. But we still had a mutual respect for each other and became friends after that race, right? But we were broken away and we were getting to the closing kilometers-ish of the road race. And I kind of viewed him as a threat that I wanted to get rid of. I wanted to remove a variable, right? And that's how I viewed him at the time. We were all rotating super hard, trying to keep or grow said gap of our breakaway, because at that point, we were all guaranteed a medal. And I was looking at him, and I'm like, ah, he's tired, right? And then, in the rotation of the... Our little pace line, like he was in the front, and then like the guy from California had just like started, you know, coming back. I kind of put my arm around the California guy and just kind of whispered, I'm like, we should attack him on the feed zone hill. And he kind of, he's like nodded. And, and then sure enough, we hit that feed zone hill. I was behind the California guy. He looks back, he sees me, he hits it. And I was able to follow. And sure enough, this guy from South Florida was unable to respond. Like he. One, we caught him completely off guard, and then two, like, I think he just had no legs at that point. And I was just, like, kind of patting myself on the back, I was like, sweet, like, got rid of him. But then, like, in that attack, I sensed my legs kind of starting to cramp, and I was like, oh, shit. And then, like, and then that California guy, like, played me in the closing. Kilometers, where it was, like, kind of rolly, it was, like, really fast, but, like, there was just, like, a series of rollers, and, like, we started rotating, and, like, you know, I flicked through, I flicked my elbow to, like, have him come through, and he wasn't coming through anymore, and, like, he was, um, he was feigning weakness, right, and I could kind of, like, sense he was, right, he was just, like, uh, you know, making all these body movements and making these sounds, I'm like, oh, you motherfucker, right, and then, like, the next, like, hill, I'm like, I'm gonna test you, because I don't believe you, and then, like, sure enough, I just kind of went a little hard in the hill, but he was, like, right there with me. And I'm like, oh no, like, this isn't good. And sure enough, he hit me, he attacked me on like the last hill before a downhill. And again, kind of like what I said earlier about the win, where as soon as you made that right turn into the downhill, the speed, like if that gap was created and he was going a certain speed, the wants needed for me to close that gap. are kind of impossible, not to, like, and, like, let's, let's not even, like, mention the fact that I was, like, basically cramping at that point, and I remember I, I wrote this, I think I called you, I wrote this in the notes, and then, like, you, you made me realize, like, you shouldn't have to attack that South, South Florida guy, because he could have helped you chase him down, I was just like, like, you're right, you know what I mean, and, like, I get my own hubris, like, got to me at that point, I was just kind of like, Yeah, you had over-focused on him to the point where, like, having him with you would have given you somebody else to ride behind, and so it would have been, it would have been two-on-one, because, you know, if you recognize he's tired, keep him with you, because you know you can get him at the line. Yeah, yeah. You know, when I lived in New York, and these, the guys who I was racing with out there from Guyana, like, I remember I was in his breakaway, the Tour of Somerville, in the Cat 2 race, I think, and... like, we were fucking gone, and then like, it got to a point where like, the guy couldn't pull through anymore, and I was, I just grew so frustrated, I'm like, ah, fuck you, I'm gonna ride away from you, and I rode away, and I was like, out for like, another lap or two, and then the field caught me, and then afterwards, they're like, why'd you drop him? I'm like, because he wasn't pulling through, and, and they're like, they, that's when they told me, it's like, or I guess that's when I mean, he understands, like, the breakaway is only as strong as your weakest link, right? You know, and like, if you, if you, Having those people there is still important because it gives you that little bit of reprieve when you're having to try to stay away from the field. Actually, I know a lot of people who ask me, how do I pace a break? Stuff like that. My answer is always, how much further do you have to go? Who's with you? Are you eating enough? Is it hot out? All the variables that would say, Okay, so if it's like, if you've got 10 minutes left in a crit, like, why even think about it? Just go. But if you've got three hours left in a road race, now it starts to matter a great deal. What's the course like? What's the win like? Et cetera, et cetera. So, like, I think this would probably be my last bit of advice, which is that you're not, a lot of people, I think, especially early on in bike racing, I think a lot of people grow past this pretty quickly, but. You're not racing the course. You're racing the people. And recognizing, because everybody sees the same course, and it's easy to pick out this hill steep, I should attack here to establish a gap, et cetera, et cetera. That kind of stuff is like bike racing 102, after you learn drafting and eating. But at the same time, everybody knows that stuff. And then once you kind of stratify the race based on who's strong and, you know, who's pack fill or who read the race tactically right, like that kind of stuff. After that point, it's way more about the chess game than it is about just like raw watts and making sure that you've got the chess pieces and like the, you know, the tactics in your back pocket as opposed to just like showing up with overwhelming force. Yeah. You know, it's not like World War II, where, like, you develop a nuclear bomb and everybody else is like, oh, we're still firebombing, oh, man. Like, that doesn't happen in bike racing. Yeah, I mean, I think the only time that that actually happens is if the race is just going uphill, right, when it literally is like a fitness test. Like, it's all about watts to kilo. It's like, yeah, if you have the watts and you can ride away from everyone, then cool. Like, that's probably the only time that's gonna go well for you. Yeah. They're like, if you're, if you're that kind of guy in a rolly to flat crit, and if I'm behind you, I'm just going to let you do that all day until it's time to actually race or it's time to sprint. Yeah. Yeah, it's funny because it's like Pike's Peak. How many people who win that race have like the worst watts per kilo in the group? Like, not a lot. Right. Yeah, trust me, I know. I exploded on that shit like two years ago. All right, so you want to get to some listener questions? Oh, man, I'm afraid, but yeah, let's do it. All right, let's see. This went up alongside the regular weekend Q&A, but we still got a lot of good questions. So, how do you get better when there are only high-stakes races and only a few months a year? or I guess only a few races per year. So like, so, cause this is one of the things that, that actually you had in the notes that I completely forgot to touch on, but you know, using local weekend training races for practice and like trying shit out that you never would do in a big race. So like when you've only got large races around you and they're infrequent, how do you practice? How do you hone your chess game? Yeah, that's perfect. Yeah, using Using local races or local group rides to just try shit that you know that one, maybe you're too afraid to try in a big race because the stakes are high or maybe can't, you know, like just experiment, right? Like throw shit at the wall and see what sticks. It's like attacking the gun, you know, or attack a kilometer from the sprint or wait for the sprint, you know, or all these things that like you like get out of your comfort zone. and then try those things and see what happens, right? And get to the other side and just be like, and then like kind of do, like I said, like I said, like a little retrospective and you're like, oh, I did this and then this happened. And then like now you know how one, like your body will react to something like that or how the field will react to something like that. And like that now all of a sudden can like, you add that to like your mental Rolodex and like, okay, so that's, that's, that's what happens or, you know, that's what I will do or whatever. And speaking for myself, there's a... Local Group Rise on Tuesdays, Stages Group Ride, and I, the guys who cut, the guys who do these, these rides are like just monsters, but it's also like, it's like a strict drop ride, all right, and like this group rise are probably a little different than maybe most group rides where you just, it's like a, it's like a rotating pace line the entire time, right, everyone's getting fatigued, and like, you know, I know I texted you a couple of times, I would just wait for the sprint because I don't, oh, I'd never do that. I don't have a great sprint for a field sprint, I have a great sprint for being a breakaway rider, and I haven't done this group ride in quite some time, so I just started doing it, and I just started winning them, because I'm just waiting for the sprint, and frustrating the local strong guy, who's a national champion in Masters multiple times, frustrating the shit out of him, and it's funny, because the first time I did it, I drafted him in a sprint. And then, like, when I sensed I could come around him, I did. The next time, he forced me in the front, right? And he was waiting for me to sprint. And then I was just, like, waiting, waiting, waiting. And then I went and he couldn't come around me, right? And then I think another scenario of, like, a sprint situation where I think, like, he attacked me. Oh, he caught me by surprise, actually, because, like, a friend of mine... was in front of me, and I'm like, his name's John, I'm like, John, I'm like, John, go, right, and he's like, trying to go, I'm like, I'm like, in my head, I'm like, no, I meant to fucking sprint, we're like 500 meters away, and then, and then, the masters of his name's Pat, like, he just went, right, and I was like, fuck, right, and I had to go, right, and then, like, I started sprinting, and then, like, I'm like, oh, man, like, you got me, like, I'm not, but then I could. I sensed that I was, like, closing in on him, and then, like, again, I got in the slipstream, and then, like, came around, but, like, as soon as I got, like, half a wheel in front of him, he sat down, right? Like, he's just like, ah, like, this guy. 500 meters is a long sprint, and, oh, man, it's like, we could do a whole podcast, or, well, maybe not, well, maybe me and somebody else, but, like, there could be an entire two-hour podcast on just, like, sprint tactics. 500 meters is a long way to go. And, like, I ended up, like, throwing down, like, the best, like, five seconds of the year, or maybe all time. Oh, like, a little motivation. Yeah, exactly. But yeah, I mean, like, kind of getting back to the questions, like, just try stuff, right? Try stuff that you normally wouldn't do and just see what happens. Yeah. I have to ask you, did you send the question box to a bunch of your memer friends? I might have. Okay, because I've got questions in here from people I know don't follow me because they've got, like, 20,000, 30,000 followers for their meme account. Like, if my FTP is 69, how many Grousel races do I win? Is pasta faster? Great. Let's ignore these questions. Shout out to my friends. We won't tell people which meme account you run, but it is a meme account, for sure. So, how can people with big watts learn tactics when the watts let them race sloppy? I love this question, by the way. There's something I run into with a lot of my clients who are faster than the local competition, but then they get to that next level. And it's like, it's almost like, you know what I was just thinking when we were talking about the last question? Like the number of times you encounter scenarios as you race more and more and more, your decision tree gets larger. Because like when you first start, it's like draft and then try to win question mark. Somehow, I don't know. And then as you encounter more and more scenarios and you play it through a bunch of the time, you start to realize what variables matter and you start to make a very large decision tree that you've been through many, many times and you know usually the right decision to make in certain situations. So if you are strong enough to ride away from everybody, how do you develop that kind of decision tree? What do you do? Make your brakes rub for the race so that you're actually just as fast as everybody else? No, no. I mean, I have two tips here. One, watch pro racing. I watch pro racing just because, yeah, sure, there's an entertaining aspect of it, but I honestly, the main reason I watch pro racing is just to add to said, like, decision tree. It's just like, oh, you know, people often get pissed, like, when I, like, I'm talking in a group ride, I'm like, oh, you know, so-and-so won today's tour stage, and they're like, ah, they haven't watched it, and I'm like, does that mean you're not gonna watch it now? Like, fuck? For me, it's like, you know, if the table is a return, and they're like, oh, Matthew Vanderpoel won today, and I'm like, sweet, I'm going to watch it, because I want to know how he won it. Yeah. Right? Like, you know, like, sure, these guys are like monsters, but they're not just like throwing down watts, like, you know, stupidly. There's some thought process behind that. And so, like, for people who race sloppily, here's a tip. Like, again, kind of like, learn how to race when it's easier. like kind of a hold back almost, and like try to force yourself to win in three ways, field sprint, solo, which won't be easy, and then sprint from a breakaway, right? So then that will force you to one, learn how to establish a breakaway or jump to a breakaway and then learn how to ride a breakaway, right? And then still have the legs to sprint from said breakaway. If you learn how to win a field sprint, it would just teach you like how to position in a pack. and realize that, like, a field sprint isn't about just sheer wants. It's actually about, like, positioning and, like, coming to the last corner or through the last corner. And then, of course, like, solo, you know, if you're, like, insanely strong, then, like, that'll be easier. But then, you know, still, there's some decision behind that. So it's like, where should I attack? Like, should it be this field? Should it be into the win? Like, you know, like, should it be in the beginning of the race? Should it be, like, two-thirds into the race? Like, those still, those are still, like, things that... you need to think about, and again, adds to your decision tree, and it would build you up in a way where, you know, it would just kind of make you a smarter bike racer, and not just always rely on your wants, because, I mean, honestly, it's not always going to be to your advantage. There's always someone faster than you. Yeah, yeah, Mark Cavendish, 34 out of 200-something Tour de France starts. It's always somebody stronger than you. And actually, I think in a lot of ways, That kind of stuff can help folks, especially if you don't know what kind of rider you are. Like somebody like me, it seriously took me like a couple years of sucking before I started winning bunch sprints. And I was like, oh, I'm actually good at this kind of thing. And then I was like, that's all I wanted to do because that was the only thing I was good at. And I was very infrequently going to be physiologically capable of doing anything else. But if you're like still wondering. Try all this stuff, too. And you can actually learn what kind of rider you are, because not everybody's nearly as versatile as Mr. GC over here. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, that's a good point, too. Yeah, for sure. I mean, I think maybe people get hung up on phenotypes early on, and it's like, wait, how many years have you been racing or training? They're like, three to five. I'm like, yeah. Yeah, and that can start to give you ideas, but it's also like you haven't tried every training poke under the sun, training, training. Method, you know, in the book, Under the Sun, and like, you haven't done every race, you haven't tried every tactic, it's, there's a lot out there, and you know, you've been doing this for, you know, over 20 years now, and it's like, you know, you're still learning. I'm still learning. Yeah, and that's, honestly, that's one of the things I tell people all the time, I say in Instagram stories, I say it on the podcast, I say it in consultations, I tell people the only way that you're ever going to fuck things up is if you don't learn from it. Okay, next question. Well, I'm going to read this question, then we're going to reframe it. So legal and quote-unquote illegal ways of moving up the field in crits, like cutting people off in turns, etc. So let's reframe it to what are your basic positioning tips for being in a tight bunch? So, you know, there's that saying, like, if you're not moving up, you're moving back. I think if you kind of think of, put yourself in that mindset, then, you know, it kind of lights a fire under your ass to constantly be aware of where you are in the pack. I think that's important. You know, practicing, not in a race, to use your shoulders to move around, right? Like, you know, maybe... Using an elbow to move someone out of the way. I mean, you have to be aggressive about these things. Yeah, like, you know, for me, my biggest problem is, like, I'm so small on the bike that, like, dudes around here are, like, six foot whatever, and, like, they just can't see, right? So oftentimes I'm, like, I, like, have to put a hand under a hip and, like, I'm here. Please don't chop my wheel. Yeah, it's like you're riding a raccoon. Yes. And, you know, I think, um... You know, another thing too, it's like, if there's a gap, like, take it, right? Like, it exists. Well, I also think that having that fire under your ass for that kind of stuff also requires people to have a certain amount of fitness and bandwidth, because when you're just racing to hang on, you have very little mental bandwidth to do anything else. And this is one of the reasons that I find F1 so fascinating, and just professional drivers in general, is because they have the mental capacity to turn laps within a second of their qualifying best, and still they're thinking about strategy, they're thinking about engine temperatures and braking points. everything, and it's like... And they're playing a computer game on their studio. Yeah, they really are. The number of buttons you see them press, it's ridiculous. They're like, change settings for this one section, and change settings back, and then you've got a radio to the pit, and like, the most impressive thing I saw recently, this has been going around, was Checo Perez doing, I'm sure you've seen this, where he's... He's got his eyes closed, and he's got his hands on a steering wheel. He's on a stage, and behind him is a lap of Mexico City, I think. And he's got his eyes shut, and with no cues, he's not listening to anything. Like, from the time that he spun off the track, he does exactly a lap. He's even got the gear shifts on his fingers, and he does it perfectly. like to the 10th second visualization. Yeah. And it's like, and first of all, that's how, that's how ingrained that kind of stuff is. And I think that learning to ingrain positioning and bike race and, you know, or like, you know, drafting and saving energy and that kind of stuff, like that all matters, but then you can start thinking about when do I need to move up? How do I move up? Because that takes mental bandwidth. And so once you are saving enough energy where you are getting to the end of races, not totally empty, and that would probably be a good thing to do. Unless you're in a breakaway, in which case you probably should. But having that mental capacity to decide. Do I move up here? Do I move up later? How am I moving up? That makes a big difference. I think I'll add one more tip here, which is the thing that changed the game for me in bunch sprints and bike racing in general, which is if your bars are in front of somebody else's, you control them. You don't control them, control them, but if you put your bars in front of somebody else's, they're taking your line through the turn. They don't have a choice about it. I legitimately told this to someone maybe a week-ish ago. We were riding together, and I was playing around bumping because they were comfortable with it, and I told them just that. I'm like, look, if I'm here, my bars are in front of you, I control you. Because now all of a sudden, if my bars are in front of you, this is actually why I tap people on their hips, because I don't necessarily know I'm even there. If they start to move into me, and, like, there's no roads left, what am I going to do? I'm going to have to break, or I'm going to have to, like, bump them back, but again, like, you know, if they're kind of a little bit too far for me to even, like, get a shoulder or elbow, I'm like, what are you going to do? Again, like, if your bar is in front of someone else, you control them. Yeah, yeah, and, you know, having the... The energy to stomp a couple times and move yourself up quick, take that spot, especially before a turn or something like that, that makes a huge difference. So once you start practicing that and forgetting about your result, and some people might be like, I'm going to pay 30, 50 bucks to go to this race and forget about my result. Like, no way. Okay. But if this is something that you need to work on, it's really worth it to forget the end goal and work on the process. Yeah, but I mean, even if that becomes the goal. That should become the goal. And actually, this goes to the next question, which is, what are ways to be proactive rather than reactive, but without burning too many matches? And that kind of goes to what we were talking about with mental bandwidth and reading the race and all that kind of stuff. How to be proactive. I don't know, this is a tough one. Good recon of the competition and the course. Yeah, I think it's just basically everything we spoke about today, you know, putting all those, like, maybe not trying all these things all the time, just start adding these, like, little things here and there, and, like, once you become more comfortable with it, or, like, if that starts to work, then that's how you start to become more proactive and reactive. It's, like, I mean, even still, it's, like, you can still be reactive, right? Like, that guy in Nationals, when I knew he was gonna attack, I'm, like, I'm reacting to him. I wasn't necessarily doing anything. I was just following wheels. But it was the easiest attack to follow. But I guess because I was being a bit proactive and watching his body language, so maybe a little bit of both. But yeah, I would just say just listen to this podcast, I guess. Actually, we have a couple questions I've kind of been skipping over, but they all have the same theme. And this is really interesting to me because They're all asking about how do you balance tactics versus not pissing everybody off. Because I think that's interesting that a lot of people are finding everyone getting angry at them. I think part of it's like, it might not be your problem, it might not be everybody else's problem. I mean, a road race is not a fucking gravel race where the spirit of gravel demands that you sacrifice all of your kilojoules at the altar of the spirit or something like that. Yeah. There's, like I said, there's, there's no friends in bike racing after the race, like, if you feel like you maybe, you know, went too far, go up to the person, we're all humans, right? Like, we're all rational people, go up to them after the race, be like, hey man, sorry, it's just like, this is racing, whatever, you know, who you are in a bike race is not necessarily who you are off the bike, right? I definitely have got heated in a crit, a local crit here. Or, like, some guy was just, like, not pulling through, or, like, did some dumb shit, and, like, I yelled at him, but after the race, I was just, like, hey, man, like, sorry, you know, sorry I did that, you know, and, like, you know, he was just, like, okay, like, because he was, like, shocked and kind of pissed at me, too, but afterwards, like, he buried a hatchet, and it was fine, but, I mean, like, that's honestly part of tactics, too, right, like, you know, once you get under the skin of someone, if you're using it right, like, you beat them. Right? Because then, like, now they're wasting energy on you rather than focusing on the race. You know, I remember I was in a break in a crit, and all the teams were represented, and I was like, sweet. It was like a seven-man break, and I was like, perfect. And it was like only 20 minutes into the crit. I was like, sweet. Now it's long enough. We're going to stay out long enough that everyone's going to get tired. So now, like, my sprint that's kind of shitty otherwise is actually going to be pretty good. I'm like, now, like, I gotta figure out how to win this race. But then all of a sudden, another teammate bridged up to the break. I sounded like there was now two teammates. And that one guy had previously beat me in another crit, so I knew he could sprint, or at least sprint rather than me. And I was like, ah. I was so disappointed on my team because they just let the guy go. And before the race, I'm like, you see this guy tattooing the cap? Don't let him go. Right, I'm like, how the fuck did he, how the hell did he bridge up here without any of my teammates? Anyways, after that fact, after that was happening, I'm like, well, I gotta kill this break, right? Because I realized that, you know, a top 10, which is theoretically what I could have, or maybe a top 5, theoretically what I could have done now, knowing that I had a sprinter, a teammate who has a wicked sprint in the pack, I'm like, me being here is no longer, like, Good. So I killed the sprint, and in doing so, man, I pissed off a bunch of people, right? Guys were, like, kind of just attacking. It got to a point where guys were just attacking to attack. You mean from the break? From the break, right? Because they just, like, were getting so pissed at me. Like, I would go to the front and go, like, two miles per hour slower. So, like, that's how to kill the break, is, like, interrupt the rotation or drop the speed when you're on the front. Yeah, or, like, open up gaps, or, like, you know, like, if you're in the back and, like, some guy just came down from, came back from the front and, like, is, like, looking to slot in, but then, like, you open up a gap and they're like, no, no, no, I'm gonna get behind you, and they're like, no, no, no, you're gonna get behind, you know, like, you're gonna get in front of me, and they're like, just, like, a breakaway is successful when it's, like, a steady rotation of people working together. As soon as someone, like, stops working or just breaks that rhythm. The Breakaway is no longer going to be successful. And you see this in pro racing all the time. Guys are working together really well, and then with 20k to go, maybe some of the guys start sitting in, or when the attacks start flying, right? Now the Breakaway is no longer cohesive, right? And then now, all of a sudden, you have to make the Breakaway smaller for it to continue to be successful, right? You basically have to like... Better Your Odds, right? And, like, that might be attacking, that might be following wheels, or honestly, sometimes that might just be, like, getting back to the front and, like, pulling and, like, doing, like, the little circle thing or circle motion to, like, get people to continue to win. Like, hey, guys, like, we're not five pay away from the finish. Like, let's continue to work together. And, like, sometimes that works. But, again, like, the whole pissing people off thing, like, it's a mental game, right? And sometimes you have to use that, too. Yeah. Yeah, I've also encountered a couple weird things in amateur level racing where like, you know, it's kind of like, I've got a client who was like, I think he was either winning or he was like right behind some guy in like some local Omnium. And the guy who he was competing against in the local Omnium at like the second to last race would not let his wheel go. He could literally like come to a standing stop. and let the entire field go when this guy was still on his wheel. So sometimes like weird stuff happens and it's like at some point you've got to make a decision like this guy's endgame is clearly different than your endgame where like if you, you know, he's not going to go anywhere no matter what you do. If you DNF, he's going to DNF. If you stop for coffee, he's stopping for coffee. And it, like, and I've, so I've seen some weird stuff happen at the amateur level like that. And, and I've also run into this a lot in women's racing, where, like in North America, especially, US and Canada, a lot of people in women's racing seem to race very, very conservatively. Whereas, like, a lot of my clients go over to Europe, and they're like, oh my god, it's so aggressive here, I love it. This is my kind of racing. And in the US, it's very, I'm sure you run into this with your female clients too, where it's like, it's very kind of negative racing in a lot of ways, like especially at the local level or even at some, sometimes at the more national level. Yeah, I think like in situations like that, like again, you have to just decide whether or not like you let it get to you or if it's like low stakes, then like if someone's like, Shadowing you and, like, following you and you're like, you're like, okay, then, like, dude, just take him out the back, right? And then, like, make him pay for that decision. I've done that in a local crit where, um, uh, at Susan Night Thunder, I was broken away with two other guys and one of the guys who's a friend of mine, right, like, he wasn't pulling through or he was, like, just pulling through, like, really, um, like, slower than us, slower than me and the other guy. And I know that my friend, like, he had, like, a really good sprint. And I'm like, oh, you motherfucker, you're just saving your legs for the sprint, right? And then, like, he came off the front, and then, like, you know, I opened up a gap, and, like, he didn't slot in, and he's looking at me, and I'm looking at him, and then the other guy's riding away, and the other guy can, like, TT like a monster, right? And I'm just looking at him, and then, like, he's like, he's like, this is a very interesting tactic, and I'm like, well, you weren't pulling. And then, like, we got caught by the group, and that guy stayed away, and he won. Grant, it's just like, again, a local Tuesday night crit, but, you know, I made the gamble that, I call this bluff, basically, right? And I think, unfortunately, we both lost, right? And he was actually kind of pissed at me for quite some time after that, but then we spoke about it from a friend, right? We spoke about it, and he actually told me that, like, he was actually on the limit, and I was just like, ah, right? Like, I didn't see that, right? He used to race pro, so, you know, he knows how to, like, hide those things well, right? Like, I didn't realize, like, he was on the limit, and maybe just... Had I realized that, I would have just kept on on the rotation, let him do his thing, and maybe eventually he would have just gotten dropped, or like, you know, him and me and the other guy would have attacked, and he would have just gotten dropped anyways, right? He wouldn't have been a factor in the race, so, yeah. Yeah, I mean, that's a point where the more races you do, the better that kind of thing becomes, because you can gather more information, and it's like, the more information you have in the race, too, the better your decisions will be. Like, if you knew that guy was on the limit, you would have been like, aha! Or also, you know, it's like, I mean, Tuesday night, great, like, low stakes, but if you were really, really trying to win, because, like, this is the first chance that you ever had to, like, win a bike race, let's say, like, if you're a listener and, like, this happens to you, it's like, what are your priorities versus what are everybody else's priorities? Like, having... Yeah, I mean, sometimes... It's like periodizing. I would say sometimes. Yeah, well, what I would say in that situation is, like, sometimes, like, yeah, if you find yourself in this situation, you find you're in the race when you move, and now this guy is, like, doing whatever, and you're, like, ah, getting frustrated, it's, like, well, maybe a top three is better than Pac-Phil, right? And, like, that's just, like, the decision you have to make at the time. And, like, if you're okay with that decision, then so be it. Yeah. Right. Okay, next question is, when is the time to relax during the race, knowing you need to be one pedal stroke ahead? I don't know what the pedal stroke ahead thing means, but, like, Is there ever a time when you can relax in a race? When you win? When you cross the line? I think... Never. Well, this kind of goes to one of the things that we were talking about, where, like, you know, at some point in one race, you were like, my teammates didn't know what to do for the next chess move. And... And I think, I remember talking to you on the phone about that, and I was like, you know, at some point, people just are tired, or they just mentally check out of the race, because they're like, oh, the brake is gone, but like, you know, in that race, I remember you had done the lap trick, where you like, you made a corner, you hit lap, and then, you know, on this long Colorado straightaway, you look back, and you're looking back, and you're looking back, when are they going to hit the corner? And suddenly, it was like 20 seconds or something like that, and you were like, holy shit, we lost like 20 or 40 seconds off of our gap, or more. and then you were like, man, this new monster here decided to just reel us back for funsies or like for his team, you know, and then you got caught and you were expecting your teammates to go and nothing happened. You're like, you're like, guys, I thought we were bike racing. I thought we were teammates. Yeah, that reminds me of the local crit I did last year. or this past season, I forget, I think it was the state crit, actually, um, local monster literally sat the front the entire race, and, like, in the beginning of the race, everyone's just like, hey, yeah, we're gonna attack, and, like, people, people would attack, and he was just sitting at the front and pulled everything back, and then maybe, like, 20, 20-ish minutes into the race, everyone stopped attacking, and, like, maybe every now and then, someone would attack, and he would just bring it back, and I'm like, fuck, right, because, like, you know, For me, following those earlier attacks, it wasn't time. I recognized that those, even without him, they weren't necessarily going to materialize to anything, or I could possibly jump over to it if I sensed it was dangerous. But yeah, he was just at the front, pulling. And then I was just like, okay, this is going to be a fucking Hail Mary move. And I waited until two laps to go. I had some speed coming to a hill. My teammate had just finished attacking. caught him, and then, like, he kind of, my teammate kind of, like, pulled off to the side of the road, and I was coming with such speed, and I'm, like, looking at the gap that, like, you could see, like, a door closing, it's like those movies where, like, you know, like, it's just Star Wars doors closing, and, like, the rocket, like, the spaceship just shoots through at the last possible moment, I'm, like, looking, I'm, like, oh my god, like, this is either gonna be brilliant or I'm gonna crash, and I, I attacked, I got the gap, and I, I nearly stuck it, right, I got caught with, like, half a lap to go. But then afterwards, my teammate told me, he's like, he's like, I was right behind your, I was right on your wheel when you win. Should I have gone with you? And I was like, oh my god. I'm like, I'm like, dude, yes. I just needed, like, you to give me the best one minute of your life. That's what she said. And, and that's all I would have needed to win that race. Yeah. Right. Because, I mean, at that point, it was like, just like two-ish minutes left of the race because there's only two laps left. And, like, I just fucking threw everything to that move. And I got the gap. But then, I mean, unfortunately, you know, it's funny. He actually didn't bring me back. I cracked him. He told me after the race, he's like, dude, he's like, you cracked me. Right? But, like, the rest of his team who hadn't done anything the entire race were able to, like, kind of get to the front and make sure that I didn't win. Yeah. And especially if you know that, like... And you're likely to not do great in a bunch sprint. If you see one of those last lap flyers or last two lap flyers, it's such a good idea to go with it. Because oftentimes when it's that one person, they're going to get caught. But if you've got two people, odds of you sticking it are actually getting pretty good, like for the last two, three laps. And I remember I was at a race and one of my clients took a flyer in the last like three laps or something like that. And she got caught with about 200 meters to go. And I know, and this was for a national championship. And so, you know, we find each other after the race, she like runs up to me and she gives me a hug and she's crying. And she's just saying like, I just wanted somebody to come with me. And I was like, I was like, I know, I know, me too. If there had been two of you, you would at least have a silver medal around your neck right now. So yeah, and it's tough because, you know, if... Because sometimes with stuff like that, you're counting on everybody else reading the race with you, but when you're in the last couple laps, a lot of people are redlining, and their decision-making or their ability to do a half-second calculation of whether this gamble is worth it, they're not even thinking about that a lot of the time, where some people are, and they're on the other side of the pack, and they can't follow you. Yeah, no, but I mean, that's how you learn, right? You told me post-race, you were like, I was like, oh, I broke away too soon, or I ran out of gas, or whatever, and I think you said, like, maybe take someone looking next time, and I'm like, LOL, right? And so, like, actually, that's my tell, is, like, looking back and, like, just being, like, you know, I always had my head in a swivel. I look back to see who's behind me, right? And, like, I determined, like... Can this guy follow me? Would he be good in a breakaway? And often what I do if I see someone who I know and or who I know, who's a friend maybe, or I know who's a strong rider, who like matches my skill set, whatever, I often like look back, I look at them and I just like tap my hip or my butt. I mean, it's like just very lightly, right? Like I just point or point in my rear wheel, right? And I hope that I give them enough of a signal to know that like, oh. He's saying something to me. I should probably pay attention. So then as soon as I rip an attack, they're right there with me. Yeah, it's that weird bike racer sign language that we have with each other. And you hope that what you're saying is getting communicated across. Otherwise, you know, it's like that moment in Finding Nemo where like the dad is sitting there and that surfer turtle kid says a bunch of shit to him. And the dad's sitting there like, it's like he's trying to speak to me. All right. So last question is, what motivates you every day to keep training with the same focus and discipline? Oh, man. Yeah, like, dude, I just enjoy it, you know, just especially being out here in Colorado. I mean, like, honestly, like, I think if I stayed in South Florida, I probably would have quit racing a long time ago. But just being able to ride roads that are safe. Um, relatively speaking, um, you know, being out in nature, you know, being able to climb, like, mountains, like, there's a 17-minute climb, it's left-hand canyon, it's like 17 miles long, it's like, what the fuck, right? Um, you know, just, I don't know, like, it's, it's less about the training, per se, but just, like, the process itself, and just being able to appreciate that, put it all together, you know, and then, like, again, what I said earlier, not loving the process, not loving the result, but loving the process, like everything that kind of like goes into that, you know, like sometimes like even just like doing core, it's just like, yeah, you know, just like do a stir the pot when you get back home from writing. It's like, what's that going to cost you? Nothing. It's going to cost you like 15 seconds. Like just doing all these like little things that like in the long run is going to add up to, you know, to success down the road. But again, like just don't fuck. Don't focus on the end result, just focus on the process itself, and I think that that will take you a long way. And that goes, that's true of racing, right? Like, don't necessarily focus on the fact that you keep on losing. Try to make, like, small goals here and there, like, shadow that guy, or try to take this turn faster, or no breaks the entire crit. Like, just make small goals, and then once you achieve those things, you start to kind of build this, you know, not just, like, I would say just kind of this. Skill Set, this Rolodex, this isn't true, like what you said, you know, like, and all of a sudden you realize that, you know, over time you'll find yourself in a completely different mindset, different place, and success will come to you. And I think it'll probably come to no surprise that you are an engineer by trade. Yeah. I mean, it's that same mindset, you know, it's like, it's like the podcast with Megan where we were talking about her, her, like her, Her scientific brain, where she's always thinking, I wonder what happens if, you know, and she's always trying different stuff, and I think that that serves me and her really, really, really well, where she's, you know, willing to try stuff, she's like, she's also willing to be like, well, Coley said I should do this, maybe I'll try it, and if it sucks, then she gets angry at me, and I'm like, whoa, hold on, first of all, I'm sorry, let's see what we can do about this, and it's like a great way to Have the whole process, you know, keep processing. And I think, I think, I think the last little bits of context, besides you being in, you know, having engineer brain, is the fact that you've got a full time job, you've got a family. And I think a lot of people listening are probably like, I mean, okay, yeah, sure. But like, how do I? You know, squeeze out any more mental energy when I've got all this stuff going on with work and family and, you know, like the number of times I see you take your son to the zoo or, you know, do like fun stuff and stuff like that. It's like you have struck, you've struck a balance. And I think also, like the second piece here for context is that a lot of people I know are only motivated by their numbers getting higher. It's like they're not thinking about what's your depth of fitness or what's the process of racing and stuff like that, or they're results motivated. A lot of juniors quit the sport because they're young and they're getting faster and getting faster and they're always doing well. Then they get to a level where they go, oh, I've got to actually really work hard now. I'm not interested in that. You've been able to balance the focus on the bike racing with the stuff off the bike to a really, really successful degree, I would say. Not everything has been a great success, but compared to a lot of folks, I think you have actually struck a pretty decent balance with the information that you've had. Yeah, I mean, at the end of the day, kind of focus on what's really important in life, right? We're not pros. I do this for fun. Bike racing is fun. Riding my bike is fun. Being fit is fun. It feels nice. Exercise Endorphins, right? Like, kind of distill it to, like, what really matters to you, and I think that then you find success in whatever that means. Like, oftentimes when you post, like, Q&As, like, people are like, what can I do with six to eight hours? And you're like, have fun. I'm like, yes. Yeah, do the training, learn the process, but make sure you're enjoying it. Because, you know, if you're riding for eight hours a week, odds are you're not getting paid to do it. And if you are getting paid to do it, and you can afford to ride more, you probably should. I legitimately cut my volume in half. I'm averaging 10 hours a week, and now I'm chasing local KLMs, and I'm still able to do big watts. I'm like, how am I still doing this? You've been doing it for 20 years, and you're still riding, and you know, like, you texted me about this, you were like, how am I still this fit? And I'm like, you would not be this fit for like a four-hour race, but yeah, I'm sure my endurance sucks right now, but yeah. Yeah. All right, so anything else that you had on your mind before we get out of here? And you go ride, and I go watch F1, because it's Inverlagos today, and I'm super stoked. Yeah, I know. That's a little over, but yeah, I think, just like I said earlier, you can make small goals for yourself and not just focus on winning all the time, and I think that you'll find success in that way. And again, hopefully the main takeaway is it's not all about wants, right? Being really efficient on the bike, whether it be positioning or how you take turns and not breaking through turns and not sprinting out of turns, all these little things really add up. And you'll realize that at the end of the race, you're like, oh, I actually feel pretty good. And then try stuff, right? Take that flyer with three laps to go. You might stick it, right? Like, you won't know until you try. Yeah. Yeah. Put that normalized power on your screen and see how low you can make it to get to the last three laps. That's, I mean, like, I kind of wanted to mention Adam Ayerson's name, but like, dude, ask Myerson what his FTP is, and then look at the results, and it's going to fucking blow your mind. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Me and him used to live near each other, and we would always catch each other out riding, and he was always a good brain to pick. So maybe I'll try to have him on one of these days, and we can do a similar topic, because I'm sure it's  I'm sure he  I should get you two in a room together. That would be phenomenal. Yeah. Yeah, he'd be a wealth of knowledge, for sure. All right, man. Cool. Thanks for coming on. All right, everybody, thank you so much for listening. And also thank you, GC, for coming out to the podcast and sharing your wealth of knowledge and also just being a good dude and always being a good chat. Anytime he calls me, I am so happy to pick up the phone. And I'm actually kind of sad that I'm not working with him anymore and that he's not doing so much serious racing because I genuinely miss all that kind of stuff. I miss all the interaction and working with him. So anyway. There's also a possibility that he is going to be joining us as a coach in the next couple weeks or months, so if you would like to get a head start, if you like what you heard today and you want to work with GC, shoot me an email at empiricalcycling at gmail.com and He's not going to be a full-time coach. He's got a full-time job. He's got a family. But he is somebody that I would be super happy to have in the circle. So if you would like to work with him or any of our other coaches who are definitely full-time, full-time bike racers, we've got a lot of experience. We've got a lot of coaching abilities. And we can coach people of all levels, students, professional athletes, amateurs. If you don't even race and you just want to work with a coach, we are super happy to work with you. So shoot me an email. at gmail.com, and if you'd like to donate to the show, empiricalcycling.com slash donate, empiricalcycling on Instagram if you want to ask questions for our future podcast episodes and guests, and is that it? I think that's it. All right, let's get out of here, everybody. Catch you later. 