Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Kolie Moore, today joined by our coach, Rory Porteous. And I want to thank everybody for listening to the podcast, especially if you are new here, please consider subscribing. And if you like what you hear, give us a nice iTunes rating or wherever you listen to podcasts. If you would like to support the podcast as a returning listener, thanks for coming back. You can always let people know about the show by sharing the podcast. That is a great thing you can do. Word of mouth is absolutely fantastic. If you would like to donate the show, keep the lights on here. at empiricalcycling.com slash donate because we are totally ad-free content. And if you would also like to kind of make use of our ultimate Patreon, including being coached by myself or Rory or any of our other empirical cycling coaches, shoot me an email at empiricalcycling at gmail.com and we can set you up with that. Even if you just want to get a conversation started for the next couple, you know, a couple of weeks or months you're thinking about coaching, shoot me an email. Let's just, let's get the ball rolling. If you'd like to consult with us, you can do so by emailing the same address. And our time is your time. We can help you analyze. We can help you plan. We can look at your previous races. We can figure out what's going on with you if something's not going right. We can figure out optimizing if things are going right and you're looking for a couple extra percent. We have a lot of really cool and interesting... consultation clients that we have talked to and helped out. And it's all anonymous in case you were wondering. So we will not be telling you, not be telling anybody about you if you are concerned about that. So please shoot me an email. Also on Instagram, at Empirical Cycling, we have weekend AMAs up in the Instagram stories that is going on right now. And that's also where I ask questions for our podcast. So we're going to check out the Instagram when we're done with our main little bit here. And we are going to answer your questions. So go ask them at Empirical Cycling on Instagram. So Rory. Thank you for joining, and I figure today, since the podcast is a little bit scolding of people, there's nothing better to do than bring on a sarcastic Scott, who lovingly scolds all of his clients. So, are you excited for this podcast? Because I'm sure you have a lot of thoughts on rest and recovery days. Yeah, do it better. All right, well, let's dive into that. Okay. So let's first talk about how we generally see people screwing up their rest and recovery days. But I think first, and you really like to make this distinction, I kind of don't, and let's kind of discuss why that might be. So let's talk about rest versus recovery days. So how do you define the two and what makes them distinct? So the way I draw the line is that either I'm going to have people take a day off, in which case they're resting, or they're going to go for a really, really chill 30-minute to an hour ride, in which case they're recovering. And that's where I draw the barrier between one is rest and one is recovering. So I try and keep my terms separate. So rest is inert, and recovery is like active recovery. Yeah. Rest is sitting on the couch eating ice cream. Okay. Well, let me ask you, Why do you typically make this distinction? And I'll tell you why I usually don't. I find it's handy to... So recovering to me is... Well, recovering is a verb, and rest is very much a I'm-not-doing-anything verb. And that's essentially why I've drawn the line there. It's literally just it falls quite nicely into how my head thinks of the actual dictionary definitions. But also because sometimes I do want people to do absolutely nothing for a day or two, and sometimes I do want them to do something. And that's always going to depend a little bit in terms of what is it we're doing in any particular training block. Sometimes it's more helpful to be able to just keep the legs moving for a day, whereas sometimes you definitely want people not to. And usually where that comes down is how hard is what... We are doing, and how long have we been doing it for? So for example, we'll probably do more recovery days during a block, but we're more likely to take rest days at the end of a block, essentially allowing us to make sure that once we've come through, say, something horrible like a VO2 max block, we're giving the legs a solid rest. Okay, so, because I think of recovery as like the underlying process. Where rest is really just something to do, or kind of the opposite of a workout day is a rest day. And so to me, I'm thinking of a rest day could be active recovery, but it also could be a day totally off. Don't start with that yet. Oh my God. I've got my own clients to roast here. Okay. Well, if you are either of our clients and you're listening and you think it might be you, chances are, yes, we're probably thinking exactly of you. So, but, well, I want to get into this a little more, actually, the rest versus recovery, because I find that some people have a better time recovering and they're better on the bike if they take more days off. Totally. than if they do active recovery. And then I also find that there are some people where active recovery days are the best rest for them because if they aren't moving a little bit, they get a little stale, the muscles get a little stiff, and next time they get on the bike, they just kind of suck and it takes a little bit to open up. And sometimes there's a duration component to that too, where if you take enough days to recover, instead of feeling stiff, you feel really good. So you can kind of turn the corner on that stuff sometimes, but it's not everybody. And it's so individual that I tend to think of some of my clients as, okay, you're a middle-of-the-road person, or you're a person who needs more days off to recover, or you're a person who needs more active recovery. So that way, as you are fully recovered, you aren't so stiff. That's the kind of spectrum I consider. Yeah, that's kind of where I fall down in terms of if you look through most of the calendars that I end up writing week to week to week, there's maybe two, three complete days off that I will put in across the entire roster. And it's almost always going to be end of block properly, you know, let's take a day because we've not got anything coming up in the next two or three days that we need to be. Fully Primed For, but I completely agree in the sense that if you are, you know, if we take the VO2 max block example, if you're doing VO2 one day and then you've got a rest or recovery day and then you've got to do another day or two days of VO2s after that, you probably don't want to not do anything in between that. You want to keep those legs moving sometimes just to make sure that you're not going to have that feeling of, you know, dead heavy legs that haven't. Haven't managed to wake up from the slumber that you've put them in. The slumber. Sounds like one of those fairy tales. Well, so with that, why don't we get into the ways that we see people screwing up their recovery days? And despite our many protests, some of them continue to do so in these ways. So I guess I'll start. The first thing and the biggest thing I see that is a problem with recovery days is riding too hard. What's too hard? Well, let's make an example. If the average power for your one-hour recovery ride is the same as it is for a four- to six-hour endurance ride, you are riding too hard. If your power, unless you're some genetic freak, starts to creep a bit too far into the triple digits, that's already way too hard. I think a nice recovery ride is 100 watts, sub-100 watts for most people, especially if you're doing something a little bit shorter, because all too often people can find themselves slipping into that feeling of this is too easy. and those they end up that's when you're starting to get to people who are actually end up and going doing a nice zone two ride instead of a recovery ride and usually those are also the people where you think maybe I should just give them six hours recovery rides from now on well I mean in a way the dose makes the poison right so so like if you are if you're a high volume athlete or even a medium volume athlete and let's quantify that as somewhere between like Medium volume being like 10 to maybe 15 or 16 hours, sound fair? Yeah. You know, if you do an hour, like if Monday's a recovery day for you and you're doing active recovery and you do an hour at endurance pace and you feel fine afterwards, chances are, yeah, you're probably fine. However, if you do this enough, and I have seen my clients' previous training, and I've also consulted with a lot of people who have done this, where they Literally every single chance they get, they do an hour of quote unquote zone two. And it's to the point where at no point are you actually getting any proper recovery. It's all because you're always working and you never really get that full day to kind of like chill out and whatever. And I would rather somebody go to an extreme with their recovery rides. where you are barely brushing the pedals. Katie always says, glass cranks. Pretend your cranks are made of glass and then start pedaling. Pretend it is a late 11 speed Shimano crank set. Pretty much the same, right? Yeah. So this is something that I see. In the short term, not a problem. But in the long term, like I said, the dose makes the poison. So over a course of a three-week training block, or even two or four weeks, or even a couple months of this, it adds up. It really adds up. Even though in the short term, you start doing it, you go, ah, this is fine. It's probably too much still. You don't want to get into a habit of this stuff. One of the things that I want to be better at when it comes to being a coach, but also as an athlete myself, is trying to define what a good recovery ride should look like for an average person. And I think the actual answer to that is cycle to the cafe that's 10 minutes away from you, sit down for an hour, have too much coffee, and then cycle home. Because in reality, that's probably as much as it probably needs to be. Obviously, slightly weather-dependent and climate-dependent, especially at this time of year. A walk would perfectly suffice. Like, your ride should be walking pace. Yeah. Like, easy walking pace. Like a saunter. A saunter. A peruse, perhaps. Getting awfully close to jogging here, and I'm going to log off if you suggest that. No, no, no, no. Nah, fam. Well, not for you. Well... If you are, well, we're going to talk about other exercise modes in a second, but one of the things I always think about with this stuff, like recovery rides and endurance rides both, I think about thinking about a minimum rather than a maximum, like what can you get away with? Instead of thinking, because that's exactly it, you're just getting away with it. You aren't getting away with doing too many watts, and when you're getting away with something, you don't get away with it for long. or there's going to be a couple of weeks or a couple of months, like the, you're going to have to pay the piper on that stuff. So I always think about qualitatively, what is a good recovery ride? Like what's its purpose? You should feel great after the ride, right? So you want to get a tiny little bit of muscle flow, like muscle blood flow. You want to get a little bit warmed up. Um, excuse me. And you also want to loosen the muscles up, like just. You know, squeezing the muscles, just those contractions are enough to, you know, if they've been, you know, if they've been inflamed, like they're full of fluid because they're swelling and repairing, just a little bit of squeezy, just a little squeeze, kind of the same as like a massage. You want to have a very light massage type of ride. You don't want to be like sprinting. Those are contractions too, but they're too hard. Metabolically, they're too hard. So thinking about... How do I want to feel when I get back? If you get back and you're feeling a little warmed up and you're like, man, I'm ready to go, that's what you want. Because now you keep that feeling of being really good for the next day. You get on the bike and you fucking smash. Like, that's what I want to see. Feeling like you've missed out on a good day of riding is probably a good way to end it. Because although you've had a good day of riding because you've just taken it nice and chill, the fact that you felt good enough to want to go and do more is probably a sign that you've done little enough. Yeah. It's interesting hearing you describe it as, you know, that glass cranks, very easy pedaling. There's an interesting overlap there with Jeffrey Hooglund's warm-up when he went up to set that kilo record, because his warm-up to do the fastest one kilometer anyone's ever done on a bike was literally just 10 minutes of really easy pedaling, walking around for a bit, stretching a wee bit. Pedaling a wee bit more for another five minutes. Fifteen minutes later, he maybe thinks about going up and doing his effort. He's effectively done a recovery ride before he does an enormous effort. And in reality, that's probably what most people should do. Yeah, I mean, because in a way, it's a warm-up, right? It's preparing your body for exercise. And a little bit of exercise goes a long way in terms of telling your body, we are exercising. It doesn't take much. Now, of course, if he were doing like a VO2 max effort, like if you were doing an individual pursuit, I'm sure his warmup would have been a lot harder because you really need to feel it. Yeah, you really need to feel it. You need to really open up the muscle blood flow. You need to activate your sympathetic nervous system. And you've got perhaps a neuromuscular connection is a big one because I'm sure like that morning or the day before, or even in a couple days before, he did some really short, sharp max efforts, like standing starts or whatever, that basically prepared him for that kind of effort without going too deep into the tank. And so, you know, and that's like a sprinter-specific thing, but forget about that. Anyway, so it doesn't take much to get your body ready to exercise. That actually reminds me of another way that I see people screwing up recovery rides is they add things that are taxing in a different way. So like adding sprints to a recovery ride is the dumbest way to take a recovery ride. And along the same lines, going into the gym and lifting heavy. What the fuck are you doing? Lifting heavy in that you're supposed to be recovering and there's more than just your muscles that need to recover. So we'll talk about that in a second, but Rory, I see you are itching to... Yeah, this is the downside with the 10-minute cafe ride suggestion is if you live somewhere like Edinburgh, like I do right now until I move, where it's very... Hilly, no matter where you go. The common joke is to get anywhere in Edinburgh you have to go uphill and then to get home you have to go uphill again. But it's maybe not as good to do your recovery rides outdoors if that is the sort of terrain you're going to have to deal with because whilst you can do, you know, if you have to go up a 15% grade on your endurance ride that's something that's probably going to be absolutely fine as long as you're not sprinting up it. But the other place to do a recovery ride is 30 minutes at home, on the turbo, you know, minimal kit, minimal time to have to get ready to get together afterwards, maybe don't even need chamois cream, maybe don't even need a shower afterwards, like thinking about the ways to make your recovery ride something that you're willing to do because, you know, it feels like, like one of the common things that has come back from a few athletes I coach is What are these actually doing for me? It's a lot of effort to have to put kit on, get ready, go out, and then do very little for an hour. And it's like, yeah, but you could do this inside. It'll work inside. And it's probably a lot easier for you to just spend five minutes putting your kit on, put the bike on the turbo and spin. And you've got the advantage of it being a very controlled environment. You're not going to accidentally do it. Temple Ride for your recovery ride. You're actually going to just be able to set it and forget it. I don't know. I've seen a lot of comments like, oops, I tripped and I did zone three today for my recovery ride. I had someone after, and this is one of my main culprits here, went out to do his FTP test. He did a rather delightful, I think it was like 360 something watts. Yeah, 360. Which is how much improvement, by the way? About 20, 30 watts, something like that? 20 watts, I think, 25. Pretty good for if you had two block, yeah. And then I'm looking at his workout right now. He stopped for about 10 minutes after the test. Did absolutely no pedaling. I assume he was either outside a petrol station getting food or sitting on the side of the road. But then the remainder of his ride where you're meant to be either, you know, a nice little bit of endurance to get yourself home or recovering if that's all you're able to do. Normalized power for one hour after the test was 317 watts. Just absolutely smashing it all the way home. It's like, was that energy? He just had a big win. Like, he wants to celebrate by unloading a couple extra watts. Like, let the man have some fun. I mean, he felt great, so I'm not going to blame him for it, but you know, there's points where it does make you wonder as the coach, like, could you have done 3-6-5 if you had spent that energy a wee bit before? You know what's funny is, as people get... Better Trained, they can do a max effort, like a true max effort, and they're going to recover real, real quick afterwards. Like super early season, you do that one minute blowout effort, and you're like, man, that fucking sucks. I am so tired. I can barely pedal home. And then like three months later, you do the same effort. You do more watts, and then like three, four, five minutes later, you're sitting there thinking, I'm not as tired as I was in the last one. Could I have done 10 more watts? Yeah. 15? 20? It's a perpetual question. So, that's a sign of great recovery. But, question is, Ironically. Well, did you tell him to, like, you know, deliberately go easy? Because he had a hard day. If he had a hard day the next day, I'd be like, okay, yeah, you probably should have thought about not spending that energy and keeping it for tomorrow after your FTP test. Or, it's like, It's like, because the recovery for, like, you know, we hadn't planned on talking about this, but the recovery during a ride between efforts, I also think about it in the same way. Like, what's a minimum that you need just to, like, stay open and warmed up instead of, oh, I've got to do zone two watts in between all my efforts. It's like, that is stupid. Don't do that. Just keep your warm up. Yeah, that's part of the problem with people who need to do their efforts on, say, like, Long Climbs, where the downside if you're going to do hill reps for something like Sweet Spot or FTP is obviously you get to the top of the hill, you've got to come back down it and how much pedaling you're really going to be able to do. So you always need to try and catch those athletes and tell them, like, you get to the bottom, go ride your bike for 10 minutes before you start the next interval. Don't worry about how long it ends up being between them. Just make sure that your legs are moving again. Because I had one guy who we did the very first set of sweet spot efforts, and he's pretty strong. But he got onto effort two and three and just felt absolutely miserable because he turned around at the bottom and then just tried to start again on dead legs. So yeah, you're right, we didn't plan to talk about mid-ride, but it's kind of the same principle in the terms of you are trying to just make sure that your legs feel good for the next thing that's coming, and we're talking about it in this podcast as the next thing that's coming is the next day or two, but in a workout it's the exact same thing, only it's in the next. 20 minutes, next hour. It's just, how do you get to that next stage? Yeah, so here's, actually, maybe it's good that we touched on this, because here's an analogy I had never thought of before this moment, but you shouldn't do, for an active recovery day, you shouldn't do anything that you wouldn't do between intervals. That's a good way to put it. It's a really good way to put it. Unless you're very ill-disciplined. Unless you're very terribly disciplined, because, like, the next thing on my list, is that if you are doing active recovery, you should not need recovery from your recovery. Like weightlifting. I know so many people who try to put their heavy strength training in on their recovery day, and they're going, well, it's not that many kilojoules. It's like there's way more to recovery than just what's happening in your muscles. So if you are going to do a couple sets of really heavy squats, You not only have told your muscles that they need to spend a lot of energy to repair the structural damage that can sometimes happen with that stuff, but you've also signaled we need to build tissue, and that's energetically and calorically intensive in itself. But not only that, you have now put load on your central nervous system because you need a fuck ton of neural drive to lift heavy weights. I did a couple deadlifts yesterday. I was brain dead for the rest of the day, basically. The thought process happened at 50% normal speed. And if you are going to be doing anything hard on the bike, and you are going to definitely need your central nervous system to be firing 100%. You need to be awake, you need to be snappy, especially if you've got... Anaerobic Intervals, like one-minute hill reps, sprints, repeated sprints. If you're doing any tech practice, like you are on the mountain bike or the cyclocross bike and you are practicing picking lines at speed or taking corners, you need to be 100% there and any kind of mental fatigue, central nervous system fatigue is not beneficial to you. You should not be recovering from your recovery days. Yeah, that's something that people have probably felt in themselves if you've ever had to do it. An all-out set of 30 second on, 30 second off, and you get to that fourth and fifth effort, and the legs just don't want to even start it. Like, you know that sense of heavy, you know, can't even get out the saddle to start it. Yeah, pushing chain. Yeah. That's something else. If you're getting to the start of your workout at that stage. One of the things you always have to reinforce with people is if you start your workout and you're not feeling good, don't do the workout. Go do a recovery, do some zone two instead, reschedule, adjust the plan. It's why we don't do plans that are longer than about a week long, usually. It's because we need to be able to account for this week on week and week and make sure that come out of week one. Go into week two, we know exactly what the transition between those two weeks is going to be. We're not extrapolating out three weeks from now. The only time I ever do that is if I go on holiday, because I'm not going to be there to do it. But you're trying to make sure that as you follow along with the structure that you've set yourself or that someone has set for you, you are going to be able to do the next thing. But never be afraid to not do the next thing. And that's why getting your recovery days wrong in the long run is potentially going to really inhibit that. It's also why we emphasize the long period of the three weeks to a month of chill at the end of season. It's not just to give you that rest after a lot of really hard work over the past eight, nine months. Account for all the little mistakes you might have made in terms of how easy have you taken easy through the season, because it's guaranteeing you're going to get the rest that your body needs, even if you did give it that during the season, and often when you don't give it that. But what about losing my fitness? Most of my athletes that have come back from it... have seen their fitness go up for a start. And unsurprisingly, that's because rest is really good at making you fitter. What? I know. I mean, I've made this analogy on the podcast many times, but it's like, if you are training hard enough, you'd absolutely need to rest hard too. Because... Like, let's say you're training hard like five days a week. You could not do heavy sets of squats five days a week. Because squats are pass-fail. You either do it with good technique or you don't. Like, you either make the lift or it pins you. Like, there's no in-between. And if you are kind of, you know, halfway training, like you're always a little tired, you're always a little fatigued, like you're always training at like 80%, 70%. It's like, that's the black hole of mental intensity, especially what happens when people don't get enough rest. So if you really do get enough rest, you're going to feel great on the other side of it, or you should, especially if you need a little openers, take that into account, et cetera, et cetera. It's that point where, say you did, I don't know, 80 minutes of sweet spot in your last workout, and your goal this time is to manage 90, but you can't get 80 again. Or worse, you do 60. That's biggest cue you've got to say the recovery needs to improve, your rest procedures need to improve, you need to get everything that happened between the last workout and now. And that can be something as simple as maybe you just need an extra day. It can be something more complicated as how has everything else in your life gone up until that point? You know, did your wife serve you divorce papers in the last few days? Well, maybe. that's had an impact on your ability to do your workout. Or your husband. Or your husband, of course. Or your non-binary spouse. Well, I think that that's something that, well, we hadn't really planned to talk about here, but it should be taken into consideration is the off-by-stress. Because stress, regardless of where it comes from, has the same impact on your body as like a really hard workout. But it doesn't come with Any kind of fitness when it's over with. But it definitely impacts your recovery. And that's something else that needs to be taken into account. Like, I think I got two or three questions on this weekend's AMA so far, asking like, oh. You know, I've got a lot of stress, I can't really ride, yada yada. It's like, don't worry about it. Like, this is where your recovery is going to be impacted, and you need to account for that on the bike. And you can definitely get in a warm-up, see how your legs feel, but oftentimes, if your off-bike stress is like an 8 to 10, or even a 7 to a 10, out of 10, odds are, your recovery is so impaired that you... I pretty much tell my clients, you get one good workout, or you get one race with this level of stress, and then it's going to take you quite a while to recover from that. And that has come true way more often than not. And that's something else that you should consider with recovery is like, what's going on off the bike? Yeah, I think a common thing that probably all of us have gotten asked whenever a new client comes on is, How much do you need me to ride my bike? And the actual answer to that is whatever you can fit in without ruining every other part of your life. Because ultimately your ability to keep up on good sleep, manage your work life, your relationships, other aspects of your mental health, that's the actual important stuff that's going to define. How much you're able to ride, not how much free time have you got, which is why when I ask people to give me their availability at the start of the week, it's not how many hours you've got, it's what's the minimum number of hours you think you've got. You have five hours in the afternoon. Great, how many of those do you actually think you will be able to sit on a bike for? Yeah, give yourself 30, 45 minutes to get ready for your ride, maybe 45 minutes afterwards, maybe an hour to shower and eat. Also, now your five hours has turned into three. And that's reasonable, because every time I ask somebody for availability and they give me when they're busy, I'm like, this is not your availability. This is your busy time. This is my unavailability. Yeah. And that doesn't even include commuting or chores or literally anything else that has to happen. And so I could give you a couple rides that day between your morning class and your afternoon appointment and then in the evening again. Or if that's totally unreasonable, I don't know that. You didn't tell me that. You could just say two hours, which would be perfectly fine. I want to get to the next point, actually. Another thing to not do on your recovery day is drastically cutting calories even though you're really hungry. Eat more. That's my recommendation. Eat more. And that's the weird thing about a recovery day. Oftentimes, and I think this is why this happens, is because when you are in the middle of a really hard bit of training, Your body is under stress. And then once the stress dissipates because you have recovered a little bit and you're resting, you get some extra sleep, your body goes, wow, we are way in the hole on the calories. Like we need to eat because you are not only giving your body stuff that it needs to restock your glycogen stores. You're also giving it literally the raw building blocks of like muscles and proteins and things that you need. Like you are, you're building mitochondria, you are building new capillaries, you are building red blood cells, you are building, take your pick. And you, you're perhaps building a lot more other proteins too. Like the, the list is very large. And if your cells are dividing, you need fats, you need hormones, like you need food and you need good quality variety of food, the whole nine yards. Nine Yards? Is there a meters equivalent of the whole nine yards phrase? I don't know what your American units are. I think it's a football thing. You know, the game that you play with your hands. Oh, hand egg. As I think Brits condescendingly refer to it. I would rather call it that. I just call it six hours of adverts. It is also that, according to the last football game I watched, which was probably about 15 years ago at Thanksgiving. I watched the Super Bowl that Beyonce played at, and I can honestly say it was the worst thing I've ever stayed up until 4 a.m. for in my life. That's what you get. Anyway, so the thing to think about with dieting and a rest or recovery day is that you are probably carrying some sort of deficit from your previous days. If you are supposed to be dieting, obviously you're going to be a little hungry, but you should not be starving, where you're weak, where you've got brain fog. One of the ways that I do this, because I've been trying to get less fat in the last couple months to years, is if I'm really, really, really hungry, while I'm trying to lose weight, I will have a small snack. I'll go have a small granola bar. Something like that. Or I'll have like a little handful of whatever, something that's got both carbs and protein. And then I will wait 30 to 60 minutes and see if I'm still absolutely starving. If I'm not, I'm like, okay, great. I covered my needs. I'm as hungry as I usually would be at this point. Fine. But if you feel like you are crawling from the couch to the fridge for your next planned meal, you probably need a lot more food. It's a good day to rehydrate too. If you're thinking about food, you probably just need food. Yeah, for sure. And a lot of the time, I find that people will not account for their off-bike and beyond basal energy needs. They won't account for getting up and walking around. If you do 5,000 to 10,000 steps a day, just in your regular chores, You know, off-bike, work kind of stuff. You are probably burning a lot more calories than your like, you know, basal metabolic calculator online would tell you to, because you absolutely are, because energy like is spent with movement. So don't screw yourself on the calories, especially on rest days, even though you're like, I spent no kilojoules, I only get 1800 kilojoules. Like, well, you're 165 pounds, like you need a lot more food than that. Yeah, don't fall into the trap of thinking that I have a desk job, so I'm not doing anything, when in reality, you're sitting at a desk thinking really hard a lot of the time, and that requires quite a bit of energy to actually do it. And that seems invisible because you're not moving, but you're doing a lot. And that's also tying into all the other things we just talked about there in terms of whole life stress. All of this comes together in the same way. Yeah. And one of the ways to actually be sure that you're eating enough is actually seeing your weight come up a little bit. Because you should be restocking glycogen stores. You should be gaining some water weight with stress and inflammation and things like that. And so don't be freaked out about that kind of stuff. Like the one to two days after like a hypertrophy lifting workout, super, super, super long rides, stage races, most people gain weight. through these things. And that's okay. You've got to account for it and just don't be freaked out by like, oh my God, I'm up a pound. I need to like cut 3,500 calories out of today. No, you don't. That won't work. That's going to go very badly for your next day. Yeah. What have I got tomorrow? VO2s? Yeah, I'll be fine. Yeah, thinking about your next day workout matters a lot. Well, we kind of already touched on my next point here, which is that for your recovery and rest days, mentally stressful things can impair your recovery. And so one of the ways that you can actually help your recovery days and your rest slash recovery days is putting them on a day when you've got fuck all going on. When you can just lay on the couch, you sleep in, have a long morning. Have one cup of coffee and be totally fine. You sit there and you pet your cats and you watch, I don't know, every Nicolas Cage movie on Netflix or something. That's not relaxing. All right, fine. You can watch every Disney movie on Netflix. That's not relaxing. Also, there's no Disney films on Netflix. Oh, what do I know? They have their own thing. I haven't watched a Disney movie in absolutely forever. Is Toy Story Disney? Oh my God, you're so old. I agree, though, in the sense that I often end up scheduling recovery rides on Mondays for people, or days off on Mondays for people, because back to work, stress coming back up, coming off of the weekend, that's where regular athletes have most of their time available. They might have an hour and a half to two hours in the week, but they could have 10 hours total at the weekend that they can make use of. And sometimes it's good to be able to make use of all of that. But coming off of that sort of like large chunk, going into a work week where you've got a lot of stress, take the first couple of days easy. We're talking about recovery here in the context of like what a recovery ride looks like, but we should say that sometimes that's two days, sometimes that's three days, depending on what it is you actually need, what you're... Living Situation, what everything else going on in your life is, what you've done previously. If you come off a recovery ride and you go into the next day and you know it's again that feeling of still don't feel quite right, congratulations, you're doing another recovery ride. And it's only going to help you. One of the things I try and tell people who are looking into coaching and are trying to get impressions of different programs, different people, I always try and warn people, don't fall into the trap of people who are just talking about making you do intervals all the time, because the intervals are 20% of our job. The intervals are the way we drive the improvement that you're going to have, but it's how we fit all that in that's actually important. Intervals are a very small subset of what makes coaching and training special. But what we're talking about today in terms of how you get from interval session to interval session is the actual important part. It's why we talk about zone two a lot, because that's the thing we want you to do a lot of, and how many coaches are going to say, yeah, I'm just going to get you to ride for five hours a day, because it's not flashy and selly, but that's the things that kind of do it, and the recovery side of things is very important. Part of That and making sure you understand how much you need specifically helps your coach as well. If you're signing up for coaching with anyone or even if you're picking up a pre-built training plan, knowing how much recovery you need is an important part of that process in terms of tuning that plan towards you or helping a coach tune the plan towards you. If you know I just need two really easy days after I do any sort of workout, great, I can work with that. If you feel like you can do Three days back to back, great. I'll give you more recovery than you think you need. I mean, like all very excellent points. And I think that, and I never talk like this, but it's like, you make a good point about coaching the whole human. Because it's like, the workout stuff is the sexy stuff. What really matters is how everything gets integrated, especially when it comes to considering your life stress. I think I've mentioned this on the podcast before, but I once had a client who I was working with, and people know how we work. We are doing one-on-one coaching only. That's the only thing we do. We write everybody a custom plan based on their needs and their everything. So, you know, that's why we're not going to give you like a five-hour ride with mountain passes if you like live in the Midwest and it's winter out and you can only do two hours on the trainer before you want to get off the bike and throw it in the trash. Like, like we will account for that, but it's accounting for all of that stuff that you're right, it's not sexy, but it makes the biggest difference in the world, especially with Training Outcomes. And that's why we coach the way we do is because way back in the day, I didn't used to do it like that. I just kind of gave people a plan and there wasn't a lot of feedback or, and it just didn't, like a lot of the training, it was just kind of like, I'm not seeing the results I thought I would get. What's going on? And, you know, that's how the process got refined. So, um, so that's something that you can definitely do, uh, to improve your recovery rides is getting a couple. Easy Days in a Row, if you feel like that's what you need, but that's also part of auto-regulation. Like, when people consult with me, a lot of the time, I tell them, you can try this, you can try this, you can try this, and they're like, well, what do you recommend I do? I'm like, I don't fucking know. Like, you gotta try this. Here's a couple options, and here are the things to look out for, for you to figure out how to readjust everything that you are doing. Is why, like, the most common bit of advice you'd probably give to a new coach is just coach people? Just get the experience, yeah. Yeah, the most difficult part of coaching, and ultimately why I was very happy to work with you, is getting people who trust you to coach them, and then also to give you money at the same time, ideally. But the difficult part of learning to become a coach, and it's why I basically muddled along from 2017 or something up until, probably got my ass in gear around 2020. And it was just, what are all the things I have to figure out that I don't know yet? And the things that I think often come up for, it was definitely the case for me, but I think it comes up for other people who are interested in either understanding their own training or coaching others. One of them is things like race specificity, what that actually is, what it means and what you need to do. which is simultaneously more complicated and also more simple than you'd be led to believe. It is so fucking simple sometimes. Yeah. Smash bike of it. Recover, smash bike of it. But the other part is periodization which is something that I think randos on the internet think they understand but you look at what they're talking about and they really don't. They've got that framework of Usually it's polarized. I'm going to ride 80% of my time in zone two, and I'm going to do super hard four by eight intervals one day a week. It's like, okay, you've got a rough training distribution there, but what's actually going on? And the thing that makes a good coach is eventually being able to realize, oh. I don't need 80%. I could fit in another 20% of the hard stuff, but what does that hard stuff look like? And what does it look like when you're thinking about it in the context of week to week, month to month? And that's the sort of thing that new coaches really need to figure out, which is why the thing you always encourage with new coaches is have an idea of what your plan is and then... Don't be afraid to just mess it about, change it, adjust it on the fly, not just in response to how people are training, but also how is it that the athlete is actually feeling like that whole life stress thing. I've got someone right now who's going through some personal life stuff, and they said to me, like, don't want to do any sort of intervals because I don't feel I could do them, but I do want you to keep putting rides on the calendar so that I can... Go Out and Ride My Bike. That would be really helpful to me. And then the availability last week was just, I'm going to do a bunch of group rides. Some of these might get a bit spicy, but I can be convinced to skip the spice. But the thing I know as a coach is that this is a person who probably feels like they need to go out and enjoy themselves a bit. So every single workout that was a group ride, it was spice encouraged. because that was the thing they actually need. And we can control everything else in between, make sure they're just taking it easy on all the other days, maybe a day off from time to time. But my role in that process for the last week has been get this person riding their bike and make sure they're enjoying it because the goal isn't fitness, it's happiness. Well, because the point that I think the underlying point that you're trying to make here is that you are monitoring The life stress, but also you're monitoring how somebody's recovering, and you can help them adjust day-to-day as they go. Like, okay, well, this last, you know, this last group ride was like Tuesday, and it's Thursday now, and you kind of sucked on Tuesday, and yesterday, your feedback didn't really look good. So today, you should probably skip the group ride, and maybe think about Sunday instead. Like, that kind of stuff. I wanted to kind of work that into the last point I've got for how people are screwing up their recovery days. Only taking them when you're beyond fucked is a terrible way to do your recovery. Like when you are like, oh my God, I can't even look at my bike today. If you cannot drag your carcass onto your bike and get out, if that's when you take your recovery day, no. Just no. That's very much a, the boat is sinking and now I need to get the water out of it. Yeah. Sort of deal. Yeah, that's the rearranging deck chairs on the sinking Titanic of recovery days. Which is an analogy I just learned a couple weeks ago and I like it. Yeah, the reason why three weeks on, one week off is really good is that as long as you're not getting the three weeks wrong and you get that one week right. It's very hard to fuck yourself up too much. And the thing you'd always emphasize is rest more than you think you need to. It's kind of what we're talking about here in terms of getting it right. It's why when I give people recovery weeks, it's usually a day or two off, a couple of actual recovery rides, and then some endurance rides back as we get towards the weekend, because you get that nice sort of like... Not a sudden stop, but you know, a cessation of activity for at least a day. And then just bringing it back up slowly, such that a person feels normal by the weekend, because they've had the opportunity Monday through Wednesday or Thursday. And here's another thing that I encourage my clients to do all the time. And I say this preemptively, especially as we get into like week three of a training block. I say, if you are feeling really tired at any point, we're going to start rest early. Like, if somebody's, like, Thursday goes well and their Saturday workout does not go well, and they're like, man, I don't know. This just happened recently with one of my clients, and I've been working with him for years at this point, and he knows. He knows very well. He was like, yep, legs aren't here today. I'm just going to start recovery early. Like, I didn't even have to say anything. Like, he just said that, and I was like, great, cool. Tomorrow, recover, and then next week, recovery as normal. Everything's going to be great. Training in such a way where you get to the end of like a three-week training block, let's say, or maybe even four, especially if you're kind of low volume, you can tend to go for like four. If you don't feel like you need a rest week, chances are you're not training that hard. And sometimes that's good. Like early season, you may not need a rest week at all, especially if you're just doing kind of like low-intensity fun rides for, you know, first month or two of training. Like who needs a rest week when you did six hours of like endurance riding the previous week? Nobody. Hopefully nobody. People who don't get their zone two, right? Also, yeah. Actually, Rory, before we got a little long on this section, but before we get into the next one, I want to ask you to describe the ride that you did. that made me decide that you were going to be the right person to bring on for this episode because I asked the coaches, hey, who wants to do a podcast this weekend on, I threw out a couple ideas and on the, hold on, let me go find it. Yeah, Cole asked, who wants to? Do a podcast on how to and how not to take a rest day. And you said, at full gas. And then you posted the favorite ride you did for Fabiano. Fabiano's suggestion was easy recovery pace, one to two out of ten, self-selected cadence, workout, TSS, less than 90% of your pre-ride CTL. Cool. So Rory posts his best five-minute power for the year. It was an all-time four-minute PB. On his recovery day! A nice 418 watts. Yeah, I'll take the applause. So there's some important context here that's been left out deliberately for this moment. And that's, I'd already done a rest week. I'd come off of doing, I did my rest. I did my time in the cell. In the cell? Come on, it's not that bad. I behaved, but I knew that day I felt good. I'd recovered. I'd actually done what Fabiano said, which is for the previous week. You recovered and then you had amazing legs? What kind of sorcery? So the truth here is that I'm one of these people who gets into week three of a VL2Max block and it's like a drug. I just want to do more and more and more. And I was convinced I could. Yeah, I was convinced I could break the 400 watt barrier for a local climb in Edinburgh. So I decided a week prior I was going to recover and then just go do it. And that was the day that I ended up doing it. I think the feedback from Fabiano at the time was, four minute effort, question mark. I was like, yep, felt good. So I think that's actually a really interesting thing to think about with recovery rides. It's like once you feel good and you are absolutely certain that you are fully recovered and you are ready for another training block, a lot of the time, and I'm going to really hate that I said this on the podcast, sometimes it's better to ask for forgiveness than permission. Yeah, pretty much. Like my next training block. at the time. So that was before a one-mile time trial that I was preparing for. So it was a whole load of anaerobic stuff. So I kind of needed to know what could I do for about three minutes. And it turns out I could do about 450 NAD for four. And so we went into that anaerobic block, which, in contrast to how much I love VO2s, I fucking hated anaerobic intervals. The downside is that I think For the race, I cracked 450, but my power meter was broken. So the true dark part of the story is not my refusal to actually do my recovery ride. It's that I don't have that number. You know what's funny is, usually when I go out and I do a workout and my hip is actually being kind to me for that day and not giving me little tweaks and pains, And I set up to do a sprint, or even if I'm sitting down and I sprint, I can tell right away, as soon as I start hammering on the pedals, I know exactly how many watts it is. It's like a sixth sense that you get after a couple years of training and racing. And also, it's like another thing, it's like if you are looking at your speed up a climb, I remember... I did a kind of mediocre effort after a long, stressful period in my life, and I was as light as I ever had been, and I PR'd our local five-minute climb in like 4.30 or 4.20 or something like that, and I was like, holy crap, I got up to the top in record time, I looked down and I'm like, I don't even have to do five minutes? Wait, I've got more in the tank! What the hell? It was really, really weird, but I knew exactly how many watts I did. And I was like, oh my god, that's right, I lost like eight pounds, and then I was beyond fucked for like the next two weeks as my body, because stress, you get one effort, like I said, and then I took two weeks to recover from that. Yeah, that's my problem is when it comes to VO2s. Obviously the guidance we give for people as often goes hard as you can, but I'm one of those people that really can't do that, not because I don't have the ability to empty the tank, but because I'm a bit too good at doing that. I will completely ruin a workout if for interval one, I actually do it max, max. I have to... You've got to throttle back a little bit on number one. Yeah. You have that feeling halfway into the interval where you're like, this is a PB day. I could do it. And you have to not listen to the voice in your head that's telling you to do it. Because you know on the other side of it, you're going to get in more work and then you're going to PB even harder when you've recovered. Yeah, sometimes you just got to have a little bit of delayed gratification. And on the bike, when you're feeling good, it's easy to go right for it, but you've got to think about your recovery. So, let's move into the next section before we both ADHD our way into another hour of podcasting. I just want to say that's how you can, if I am coaching you, justify doing a four-minute PB on your recovery ride. I did everything else right. Yeah. I have that relationship with a couple of my clients where they're always kind of adjusting the training a little bit, but not so much that I can't really keep track or figure out what the hell's going on with them. Because I've had clients like that where they make so many adjustments. And I'm like, can you at least move the workout description with this? Because usually it's like a day, plus or minus. And that's easy. But if we're looking at rearranging an entire week, just help me out. Luckily, I don't have any clients like that anymore. But let's go to some tips to optimize your rest and recovery days. So my first one, and this is the biggest one, get extra sleep. That's what I was going to say. Go to bed early. Go to bed early. Sleep in if you can. Take a nap. Take your ride time. and Take a Nap. Sleep is so helpful. My partner is probably in the room next door listening to me say this out loud, so I'm going to be extremely truthful. That is that I am absolutely appalling at actually making sure I get to bed on time and I wake up feeling groggy and awful most days. Even if you set the 10pm alarm like, hey, get your ass up, get to bed. Yeah, I have a bedtime alarm on my phone. I snooze it every time it does it. But, like, the truth is, the days where I do go to bed at, like, half nine, ten o'clock, best night's sleep I'll have. Fortunately, as I think I mentioned in a previous episode, I'm very much in a just-ride-my-bike mode at the moment, so I'm not too worried about much training. Yeah, you're doing vibes-based training right now, and that's good. I'll have vibes-based until Christmas, I think. Yeah, like, that's the thing I need to get better at. And the truth is that it's a thing that is difficult to make yourself do, but when you do it, you'll always be glad you did it. It's just the feeling of, I don't want to go to bed. Yeah. If you're anything like me, it's the hard part. I think forcing yourself to do it a couple times until you see how beneficial it is will... Encourage you to do it more. Although, and I do this, and this is horrible. Don't do as I say, not as I do, where I feel like if I'm really, really good about something for like a couple of days or even a couple of weeks, then I'll be like, I can make an exception this one time. And then you have broken the habit and you are like, just playing catch up again for the next like month or two till you get to bed on time again. Yeah. I mean, for me, it's like, I'm like a, like, when it comes to, like, focus and work and stuff like that, I do really well either early in the morning or late at night, because in the middle, my phone's blowing up, emails, texts, like, calls, like, I've got all sorts of stuff going on. So, so in that way, I, I, I try to, like, at least preempt it, like, a block timeout, or, like, morning, okay, get up early, have some espresso, do some reading. Then I'll start the day. Evening, same thing. Like, okay, I've got to cut it here because my brain's no longer going to function. It turns into a pumpkin and now I've got to go to bed. So get extra sleep. It's so helpful. I would say this is something that is especially important if you are the type of person who is limited in the week. and has good availability at the weekend because you want to make sure that you are getting that recovery through sleep through the week as much as possible. I'd recommend sacrificing cycling in order to do it. Yes, absolutely. And making sure that you wake up on the weekend feeling as good as you possibly can to go and enjoy riding your bike. Yeah. Actually, that kind of leans into one of the things. to, you know, we kind of touched on earlier is putting your rest and recovery days on days where you don't have much going on. So a lot of the time, I will, I don't get to do this as often as I want to, but as much as possible, I will try to give somebody a recovery day on a weekend, especially if they're working nine to five Monday through Friday or more. I really want them to have the occasional day, you know, maybe once a month or every two months, something like that. As much as I, Reasonably can give it to them to kind of take a chill day. And especially if somebody's like race schedule right now, a lot of people have like Zwift races on like Tuesdays. Having a weekend day to relax, it can be so super, super helpful. And so if you want to like do extra riding on Saturday, take Sunday off. Monday, do an easy spin, and then Tuesday, I bet you're going to feel great for a Zwift race. That's not a bad way to go, and especially because you get a whole day to do fuck off. You could sleep in, you've got nothing to do, take time with your partner, go for a walk, do something easy. Reduce the amount of total stress on that day. That doesn't work for everybody, obviously, but it can have... Because I think for some people, if they're missing that long ride on a weekend, that's more stress than if they take a recovery day. More people are like that. But you should definitely try it. If it sounds like a good idea, especially if you've got a family or something like that, take a weekend day. Even if it costs you a couple hours of training, totally fine. Oftentimes, it's worth the trade-off. Agreed. That leans into another point of reducing psychological stress on recovery days. And I think in the literature, it's called compassionate touch, which could be exactly what you think it is, as long as it's not too energetically taxing, let's say. You don't want to burn a lot of kilojoules. You don't want to... You don't want to be like, man, my quads are wrecked after that. You don't want to do any of that kind of stuff. Make it easy, make it fun. Also, maybe don't do the same compassionate touch, but if you've got pets, spend some time with your pets. Petting a cat has a hugely relieving psychological benefit. Dogs, same thing. Go to the park, throw the ball around with your dog, do the Frisbee thing, play with your kids. These things have huge, huge, huge benefits. And especially if you're under a lot of psychological stress, like at work, this kind of thing can really alleviate a lot of that and help your recovery quite a bit. So that's definitely worth trying as well. We didn't mention it during the main body of the podcast, but if you have a partner who likes to occasionally ride their bike with you, or if you have kids who want to go out and ride a bike. There's your recovery ride. Perfect solution. Keeps you easy, unless you're like a really mean partner or parent. Or the kids are really mean and they're getting fast. Yeah. If you've accidentally spawned a world-class cyclist in the making, that could be an issue. Yeah. But yeah, like... Yeah, like if you're a woman and there's like a Little Bellas program near you, go volunteer for that. Little Bellas, that can be a fantastic day to get in some skills work because it's all mountain bikes for young girls. I coach a few women who do Little Bellas and it's so great. When they do that or when people go ride with their kids, I have nothing but glowing praise for those days. I've gotten a couple of people saying like, man, I know this wasn't kind of what you had in mind. I'm like, I don't care. This is great. This is a worthy trade-off. Please do more of this. Yep. So, I only have two more ideas here, where I may have one or two others. For active recovery, you can cross-train, but it still has to be something that you would do in between intervals, at an intensity you would do in between intervals. And it has to be in a familiar training mode. Like, if you grew up rowing, or if you grew up running, or if you grew up I don't know, what other sports do people do? Playing basketball. Rock climbing. Rock climbing, maybe. Maybe a bit much. Maybe a bit much. But if you are familiar with these exercise modes, this is a great way to spend your recovery day doing. Like, not just walking a dog, because everybody walks. Most of us walk. But, you know, if you like to jog, go take a jog. Totally fine. Not you, Rory. Good. I've incorporated a regular walk into my week. Now, at lunchtime, I walk and get coffee, which is its own problem. I was going to say, it sounds like a meditation. Before we started this podcast, Cole and I were talking about our coffee addictions. But recently, for me, it's had to morph into a hot chocolate addiction. But the part I'm actually looking forward to is getting out of my flat. Walking outside, listening to a podcast, feeling good in fresh air, rather than stuck inside my home office. And like that on its own, like really helps my day. Yeah, I really like to get outside because I live right next to a tiny little pond and getting out and walking around the pond like at dusk is so much fun. Especially if it's a nice sunset. I'm stopping, taking pictures. They're crap photos, but it's pretty, whatever. There's a couple herons one time walking around at dusk. I saw this heron in the twilight. It was sitting there. It's got a fish draped out of its beak, and it's just standing there with this fish like, oh no, now's not the moment to eat this thing. I'm going to wait. And I was like, this is so cool. And I get back feeling so great and so motivated to do anything. because it's so relaxing. And that's my active recovery a lot of the time instead of getting on the bike because for me, I'm slow and fat. So my recovery rides end up being like endurance pace just by nature of I literally can't pedal any slower up these damn hills. So I'm one of those people who like has  That's why you've got an e-bike though, isn't it? That's one of the reasons. I've also got my track bike set up on the trainer. with my kilo bars on it. So I can just like sit there and spin easy. I don't even cinch up the resistance unit or I'll do it very lightly and I'll just spin easy for a little while as my active recovery too. So that's another way to do that or get time in your like TT position. It's a good way to do it. So my last idea for improving your rest and recovery, we've already touched on this, is to try to get in a couple in a row. Like if you only Especially during your regular training weeks, if you only ever do like an easy day like Monday and an easy day Friday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Saturday, Sunday are all hard workouts, you may benefit from, well, hopefully you reduce one of your five hard workouts to an easy workout like an easy endurance ride. And then, okay, so you've got four days, that's a start. No reduce, only smash. And like take Monday, Tuesday. as recovery days, and then like Friday as a low, low intensity ride. And that is probably going to help a lot. Because a lot of my clients, when I do this, when I give them a couple days in a row easy, like at the start of a week, they love it. They get to that first ride and they're like, I can't wait. I'm going to rip the pedals off my bike. That's what I love to see. This is why the... Athlete Feedback Thing is so important in terms of our ability to actually gauge what it is people need and what it is they benefit from. One of the things I like to see, and it comes up more often than I ever expect it, is the feedback after a long endurance ride of, oh, I just felt so much better than I thought I would. And either that is the result of, you know, they've come off a rest week or they've come out of a hard workout the day before that they think is going to floor them. But the important thing I'm learning there is all the recovery that's happened between the last thing and this ride has presumably gone correctly if they felt good. And that's what we want to be able to see in here. Because if they're coming back and saying, I didn't feel great, then we know for future we need to take it a little bit easier between these two things. Or we maybe need to think a bit more about what the structure of this week is going to end up looking like. Or potentially even adding openers. If somebody kind of gets stale after a good rest. But at the same time, sometimes if there's been enough stress, I'm going to occasionally, even though I know somebody needs openers, I will kind of gamble on them needing a little more rest. You know, it's like if you are heading into a race that you're going to train through, like if you've got a Saturday race and you've got to work out like Wednesday or something like that, and then you take a ride Thursday. And I don't know why people plan openers when they've been training hard. Don't do that. But a lot of the time, people will do an opener workout, even if they've been training that week. I don't know what's up with that. A lot of the time, don't do your opener workout, especially if you start riding that day and you're like, man, I'm a little tired. You're tired. You don't need openers. Openers are a privilege for the well-rested, according to one of my old coaches. I still believe that. That's absolutely true. So sometimes... Also don't feel the need to do openers the day before. Yeah, two days, three days sometimes. Give yourself space. Yeah, especially if the openers are really hard and you actually need to recover from them, even if they work, give yourself an extra day. And sometimes you can even make them harder, et cetera, et cetera. Do you have any other thoughts, or should we get to some Instagram questions, because we've got maybe, looks like about 15? I have lots of thoughts, but I don't think any of them are relevant here. Okay, cool. Typical for ADD people like us. Pretty much. Can you lift during recovery weeks, is question one. Full gas. Stop. No. Jesus. Recovery Weeks or Recovery Days? It's Recovery Weeks is the question. I'm going to say occasionally I will  okay, so here's how I usually think about it. If I'm giving general advice  and this is the problem with general advice is it doesn't take into account every little it depends. But if I don't know anything else about you, I'm going to tell you to  Take a delo day in the gym on your recovery weeks. Because if you're going to recover, lean into the recovery week. Don't be like, okay, I'm recovering on the bike, but I'm going to do week five of my bodybuilding mesocycle today. So I've got five days in the gym this week, and three of them are doubles. That's not a recovery week. You have just done different exercises, and you've done it hard. The exercise modality is a little different, but don't do that. Occasionally, I will break that rule for folks. Oftentimes, it's because I would give somebody a gym day on Monday or something like that, and then we can take Tuesday through Friday to recover. It's like that Monday would be just like the end of their training week. And then perhaps the next week, kind of depends, but a lot of the time. Maybe it'll be a deload, so you're fresh on the bike, that kind of stuff. So there's a couple ways to manipulate the variables, but for the most part, I'm going to suggest if you do, make it really light and like technique, range of motion kind of focused. Always have in the back of your mind whether this is actually going to help you fulfill the goal of your week. We talk about like the goal of particular workouts or sessions quite a lot, but you should also think about what the goal of the week is. Something like a sweet spot block, it's obviously do a little bit more than last time. and the goal of a recovery week is feel better at the end of it. Yeah. Feel fresh at the end of it. Yeah, just like a recovery ride. You want to feel good at the end of it. If you need to recover from something during your recovery week, that's probably a good sign you don't need to do it. Next question. All right. Before reading this question, Rory, Do you feel like more people are trying to fill in every single day as if they're missing something if they don't get to the end of that day absolutely exhausted? We've got to do the miracle intervals every single day, Cole. How else do we get better? I don't know, because this person is asking, Jim? in the bike off day is rest day or better be completely off. Obviously, English is a second language here. So can you be in the gym on your off day or is it better to... So we kind of addressed this already, but... Yes, on a spin bike, doing it really easy. There you go. Yeah, if you go to the gym, get on your spin bike and recover. Like I said... It's better usually to not try to squeeze in everything you possibly can. Changing your exercise modality does not make it, it's not like recovering on the bike doesn't mean you can like go to the gym and smash. Filt sent everywhere else. Yeah, like recover and recover, just recover. One of the things we mentioned very near the start is, you know, one of the things you can do for your recovery is just go for a walk. So if the end result of you, Walking to the gym is that before you've even gotten there, you've done the thing we recommend that don't do the things you were going to do at the gym, just walk back home. Oh shit, I had one more thought on that. Oh, one of the things I see people do a lot is they will go do something active. Like they'll, they'll, here's the thing very common, people will commute on the bike. They'll commute, they'll ride for 10 to 30 minutes, even 60 minutes one way, then they'll do it the other way home, and then they'll get on their bike for a recovery ride. You already did two recovery rides. You did your recovery activity. You do not need to pile on. Like that, if the dose makes the poison, if you do like six hours at recovery pace, you have still exercise for six hours. Yeah, there's nothing wrong with keeping your commutes in as part of your recovery week. Just understand that, you know, ideally, from my perspective, your commute into work should pretty much always be what a recovery ride is anyway, because on the one hand, it's probably not going to be enough of a duration to let you do anything that's going to actively be of use. But also, I don't want you to get to work and just be covered in sweat. So, you know. Your actual goal there should be, I'm getting to work, and then on the way home, getting home from work. And sometimes that just means, take it real easy, that's all you will do that week is just your easy commute. And then evaluate at the end of the week, did I actually feel refreshed at the end of it? Or do you maybe need to get the bus next time you do a recovery week, a couple of times a week? Probably safe to do a couple days of commuting, but yeah, like commuting is something that I think for a lot of athletes is very valuable, both in my second job as a sustainability professional, but also because as a coach, it gives people like an extra hour, two hours a day that they can potentially be getting in of some easy volume. Yeah, there's a real risk there that it's not actually something that's going to facilitate you being able to recover, especially if it's like city riding and you're having to stop, start, stop, start, and you're never actually spinning your legs successively for longer than a minute at a time, having to constantly accelerate. Well, having come from Boston and having commuted like that a lot, I could say for sure, it's fine. As long as you're not like... You know, when the light turns green, you're not trying to race that city bus. Because, you know, that bus isn't going to get off the line. You're going to beat it every time. Don't even try. Like, you got this. Like, you already won. You're on a bike. Like, just make sure the bus doesn't hit you. Next question is, 46 years old, can't recover from weekends in one day anymore. Rest more like Monday and Tuesday or train less? We already hit this. Yeah. Like, rest Monday, Tuesday. Why not? If that cuts... down a workout a week, so what? Especially if you're doing five hard workouts a week, going down to four, taking an extra recovery day, I would recommend that if you were 20. Your recovery week doesn't need to start on a Monday. Yeah. Yeah. And your training week doesn't need to be Monday to Monday. Yeah. I've got someone who often ends up doing a lot of stuff with his partner and friends at the weekend sometimes. And that usually means he's going to have the weekend off, maybe even the Friday as well. I was like, okay, guess what? Your recovery week started on the Friday. You did nothing over the weekend. And then just Monday, we're bringing back some chill riding. You probably already feel fantastic because you've done nothing all weekend. And that just means that we're back to kind of normal by the next Friday rather than the next Sunday. you know don't don't lock yourself into that Monday to Monday thing just because that's the way calendars are laid out unless you're weird and have it Sunday to Sunday. I once had a conversation with someone where um where I I remember I was I was giving them like a couple extra easy days like Monday, Tuesday and then like Wednesday would be like an endurance ride or kind of like you know skills medium kind of day and uh and I think he asked me like why are you doing this and I said well You know, because you rode for like 12 hours this weekend, like doing not easy stuff, like you're not recovered. And he goes, oh yeah, like your body doesn't actually reset on Monday just because it's a new week. And I'm like, yeah, you still like did a lot of hard shit yesterday or even two days ago and you may not be fully back. Like it's worth considering, like if you are, if you looked at a calendar as like one 365 day long quote unquote week. You would see it very differently. And so I encourage people to consider removing these artificial boundaries that we have for ourselves. Because while it's sort of like training zones, the concept of training zones annoys the fuck out of me. They're not real, but they're useful in certain contexts. So the week is like the same thing. It's useful in certain contexts, but it's not real. The days are still continuous. Like, where's Kyle? Kyle, how does time work? We've yet to explain this on the podcast. Descriptive, not prescriptive. Yes. Is, I think, the cognism. It is a cognism. And actually, I want to do a podcast about training zones at some point in the future, because I did last week in the AMAs say that training zones aren't real, and I think that caused a real kerfuffle. I know what you mean, because... I think people get locked into an idea of a particular number they're expected to be doing. This often comes up for obviously endurance rides where they look at the Zone 2 thing and it's like, no, depending on how fit you are, like that range is actually quite unhelpful a lot of the time. But if you think of... the intensities you do as how easy can you do this, how long can you do this, and how hard can you do this, you'll probably have a better idea of the efforts that you need to output for any given ride than, you know, what percentage of zone two are you in, what percentage of zone four, you know, it's not that useful as a way of describing your training despite the fact they're meant to be descriptive. Yeah, and not only that, like the adaptations for a lot of the distinct quote-unquote zones, They overlap so hard. Yeah, that cog in chart with all the pluses and minuses that's also missing a zone in it, from what I remember. I think that's because, well, actually, we should get back on topic. What are we doing? We just, we started the other podcast already. We ADD'd it again. Okay. In a 25 plus hour week, is it better, a recovery ride, or completely resting on the rest days? So, I have a... I have opinions. Congrats on the 25-hour week. I have opinions, because a lot of my clients are fortunate enough that they can ride a lot. I've been looking at the training of three of your clients this past month with great envy, as I see them all knocking out 25. I think, was it Katie and Coach Katie for us, ended up doing like... Four Centuries in a row or something. I was like, oh. Yeah, Katie. She's in short sleeves as well. Yeah, Katie, Corey. I mean, when you're a pro bike racer, fucking go figure. Okay, so when you're doing high volume, usually my suggestion is the more you are riding and the more training stress you accumulate, the harder you need to lean in the other direction in terms of rest. So if you are doing, like I've got a client who, when he takes a rest week, He's doing like 25 to 35 hour weeks on average. When he takes a rest week, from like Monday through like Sunday, I tell him he can ride for six hours, no more than two at a time. And like just break it up as you see fit in between there. And he does, and he feels amazing by the end of that week. Like you've got to really lean hard into that. But if you're doing like, you know, six hour weeks. Your rest week, you could probably do six hours, just reduce the intensity quite a bit. You could do six hour long recovery rides or a couple days off and a couple one hour rides and a two hour ride on the weekend like normal. I bet you're going to feel normal like by the time you get to like Thursday or Friday even. So it's one of those things where the harder you are training, the harder you need to rest is my strong opinion. I'd agree with that entirely, not least because The more you actually spend on your bike, if you think about the energy expenditure of that, it's really difficult, even if you're eating well on the bike and off it, to then come to the end of that sort of block and feel like you've hit the balance correctly. You really need to give yourself that opportunity to refuel, replenish properly. Recover. I'm going to look at, I pull up training peaks, I'm going to look at an average 30 plus hour week for somebody, that is 27,000 kilojoules spent in the week, more than 27,000. And seeing weeks like over 30 is not terribly common, but it does happen. It's a lot of food. And your body... It gets a lot of accumulated fatigue. So you absolutely have to account for that kind of stuff. So next question. Is one recovery day of no training better than two with volume at 10 to 12 per week? I mean, this kind of gets to like, you know, rest versus recovery. But like, I think most people listening are probably doing 10 to 12 hours a week. We're so sorry when we talk about people doing a lot more. It's not to make you feel bad. If it helps people, I'm an average at eight hours. If you want to know what the average person's training is, look at my Strava. I'm at like four to six. I have noticed a bunch of you already have. Yeah. So a lot of the time, for 10 to 12 hours a week, this is I think there's a mistake in this question. Yeah. And that is assuming that one day completely off is the same as two days of mild spinning. because it's very much going to depend on how well you cope with the workload that you've just done and what you actually need to recover from. And you're off by stress too. Because I was going to say auto-regulate. Try a couple things and see what works best for you under what circumstances. If life stuff, work stuff is all pretty chill and you can consistently find a pattern that works great for you, great. Just do that. You've got life stress that's up and down. If you've got work stress that's up and down, find ways to regulate for that too. But there's not going to be a wrong answer. There's just going to be a right answer for you at the time. That's all. My gut feeling is that if you have to ask, you probably need more rest. Probably true. Let's see. Yeah, a couple of questions on active recovery versus complete rest. This is another auto-regulate kind of thing. Bike Commutes on Rest Day is okay. Absolutely. Yes, just keep it recovery pace. Don't race those city buses. Don't turn it into an alley cat. Does it still count as a rest day if you work for 10 hours? I am so sorry. And knowing what this guy does for work, I'm going to suggest that for you, it does not count as a rest day. Not even close. If you do any sort of heavy labour, anything that's going to be really physical, fitting in the bike is going to be difficult enough, as is being able to do your recovery is going to be a challenge. Unfortunately, you're probably the kind of person who is going to fall into that unfortunate trap of cycling maybe not being a great sport, because you're probably going to be too tired during the week to do much training. And you need the weekend to actually recover so you can do your job. Well, I think that depends on what you want out of cycling. Because if you love the bike just because you love the bike, by all means. Then you could probably just go ride. Yeah, I was going to say, like, after your 10-hour workday, because I've done, when I was doing carpentry, I did, like, the occasional, like, 10 to 12 or even longer. Hour Workday. And they sucked. And I would get home and I would just shovel food in my face and lie on the couch and go, uh, is it bedtime yet? Oh, I'm an adult. Bedtime's any time I want it to be. I'm going right now. And those days sucked. And I think occasionally I would get home and I would go out for an easy spin on the bike, mostly because I just wanted to clear my head. And I was pretty in shape at the time, well, relatively speaking for me. And I think I would even like go do an hour and a half on my loop, which would normally take an hour. And I would just do it at like 80 watts. And I just love just being outside and not being at work anymore. And that was relaxing for me. So that worked for me. But yeah, if you get back from that 10-hour day, it's dark out right now a lot of the time, Northern Hemisphere folks. So yeah, put your bike on a trainer, spin for 15 minutes and loosen the legs up, probably make you feel better. Or skip it, doesn't matter. 

Next question is, light upper body gym sessions for say 45 minutes for someone not too deep into any training blocks? If it's light, it's fine. The thing is, when you lift heavy, like I said before, you are using a lot of neural drive. You are generating a lot of central nervous system fatigue, potentially, especially if you're doing like deadlifts or something like that, or you're lifting close to failure. or it's just like or even if it's a new stimulus like a new stimulus like you're doing a new movement in the gym it may be like mentally taxing to get the technique right and like you're concerned about this like oh are the safety pins high enough or low enough like what if I dump this lift it can be taxing so like if it's a thing you regularly do keep it light should be fine it'll count as active recovery if you would do it between intervals it's fine Hop off the bike, do some bench press. I really got to hit all these burpees. I just drank a caffeinated diet soda. Maybe I've got some burpees coming up. This is a weird question. Fuck it, let's go. Do you have any athletes who are only recovery on demand and not prescribed unless indicated? I have ones who try to do that, who I try to get to recover. I will always put recovery in as a thing. Usually there can be a discussion around when that recovery can happen, because obviously like... People have their own schedules, and they'll have an idea of when that's going to best suit them. And so I'll listen to that in terms of if they tell me, oh, you know, for example, that guy that had the Friday, Saturday, Sunday doing absolutely nothing. It's like, all right, well, we'll do another workout on the Tuesday if you're still feeling good for it. And then that's the end of your block because the recovery starts just a few days later. But equally, if someone said, can we start sooner? We do that. One of the common things that comes up, especially for like the really hard stuff, is if you get something like the end of a deal to max block, that last week I usually tell people there will be a moment in one of these workouts where you just decide you've had enough. And it doesn't matter whether it's the first workout of that week or if it's the second or the third, but that's the one where the block ends. and just like be happy you've done it, you've done the job, that point we recover. And so that's where the adaptability of REST comes in. Yeah, I actually have, I'm of two minds about this actually, because I've done this with a couple people who are great at giving me feedback and auto-regulating, but I also feel strongly that most people should not do this where we just train until You're exhausted, and then you recover as needed. In some ways, that makes total sense, but in some ways, it sounds like a terrible idea. I think most people should rest preemptively, like before you're crying uncle. Like I said before, if you are only taking rest days when you are beyond fucked, I think that's not the way to do it. Preemptive rest is usually smart if you've been training hard enough. You can get signs of like, oh, I'm pretty tired. I should probably end my block soon. Especially when people consult with me, I've got things they can watch for. You look for X, Y, Z based on what you've been doing, and this is going to tell you if you need rest or not. A lot of the time... Usually people get a sense as they start to get towards the end of a block. and it doesn't really matter what it is. It can be just like we're doing some volume endurance, no intervals type block, but you get towards the end and you feel like I'm starting to reach the point where this is becoming harder, not just the physical component in terms of like the actual riding you're doing, but also the mental load of you having to do it is also starting to catch up with you. That's usually a good indicator that it's time to switch to the rest component. Because you could feel great up until that day, but you realize there's that day where it comes and it's just like, I need to just back off a little bit. I could maybe do another one of these, but I probably shouldn't. Yeah. Okay, next question. Discuss both mental and physical fatigue. When, how, why both are needed? Well, I don't think mental fatigue is needed. Especially when it comes to like... More psychological fatigue, in terms of like, I'm tired of getting on the bike. A lot of people, a lot of cyclists are so intrinsically motivated that our job is more to hold them back than it is to like crack the whip on them. 99% of the time, it's like, I think I equipped this on some forum a couple months ago, or I said like, I feel like most of my job is thinking about rest. and like 1% is like really thinking about the underlying nerd shit. Yeah, I'm like the opposite athlete where I need someone to just encourage me to actually do it or give me a reason to actually do it, a carrot to chase, otherwise I won't do it. But yeah, a lot of the time people are surprisingly keen to do the four-hour endurance session that I know they'll end up doing on the turbo. Whereas I cap out at like two, two and a half hours nowadays. Yeah, when the movie is over. Yeah, right now I'm trying to, I've started Deadwood, which has been quite good. But yeah, like, there's definitely a mental fatigue component in terms of, but I usually think of it more as end of season, like you're just done and that's like a really good reason to like. Lock the Bike in a Cupboard for at least two weeks. During a block, or even on shorter timescales, the mental fatigue we're usually talking about is that neuromuscular fatigue, that brain-muscle link, and just not being able to push that little bit more. But you can get that mental fatigue. Yeah, you can get that mental fatigue from a lot of stuff. But it's like your brain has to send an actual signal, which is physical. By the way, it travels down your neurons and takes energy to  well, it doesn't really take energy to make the signal happen. It takes energy to reset the nerves after the signal has been sent because you've got ions sitting on either side of a membrane. And when these channels open, it becomes a feed-forward mechanism and these ions flow across the membrane towards equilibrium and you've got to reset that and that takes energy. It takes like pumps, like you've probably heard of sodium-potassium pumps. Like that's one of their jobs. We're going to separate this sodium and potassium so that way we've got this gradient, this electrical gradient between the two that they'll, when it's time to do the thing. And that reset takes a lot of energy and just maintenance of nerves takes a lot of energy. And so when you do sprints, when you do anaerobic efforts, when you race hard, you're pedaling hard for a while, when you lift heavy. If you get brain fog after this kind of stuff, that is a very, very, very common sign of central nervous system fatigue. Or even if this is the first time you've done a six-hour ride, you can get that kind of fatigue too. And in terms of muscular, well, this is pretty obvious. You do a lot of threshold work. You do yada yada. Your muscles feel sore. They feel tired. Totally normal. And recognizing the difference between these two is kind of academic. at a lot of points. I tell people, if you're tired, you're tired. I don't care if it's motivational and your legs feel great. You've got fatigue somewhere. You need the rest. Eat more, sleep more. Yes, eat more, sleep more. Sorry. That sounded weird to me the way it came out. Like when you said it, I mean. Anyway, next question is, we've only got a couple more. What is the purpose of active recovery? Shouldn't a day absolutely off be the most effective? Yeah, that's a big, it depends. Actually, I recently heard an interesting theory on soreness, because we still don't know why soreness happens, but Andy Galpin put this forward, where he suggested that muscle inflammation, so muscles like literally swelling because of fluid for the repair process. This is not harmful, by the way. You don't need to freak out that this happens. It totally happens. This water retention, the fluid retention, stretches the muscle spindles on the outside of the muscle, and they detect this stretch and send a signal as pain. That's the theory. And so that's one of the reasons that massage, light muscle contractions, things that squeeze the muscle can help alleviate this. kind of stuff. That makes a lot of sense. However, none of this stuff, as far as I know, has really been a thousand percent proven to be absolutely beneficial for performance. Because a lot of the time, you can be sore and have fine performance as if you've done stuff that makes you less sore. So the mental aspect of moving around can also be very, very beneficial to get outside, see some sunshine. Touch some grass, whatever. Well, don't touch grass if you're riding off-road and you're dumping it. Don't do that. But other things that benefit you are increased muscle blood flow because oxygen is very corrosive. We did a podcast on this forever ago on how corrosive oxygen is and how muscles really tightly regulate blood flow because you don't want more than you need or you're going to fuck yourself up. And it's also good because muscles that are inert get stiff. Like if you literally do nothing all day and you start to get up and you're like, oh my God, how come everything is creaky? That's one of those things. Like muscles that are still cross-link a lot of connective tissue, some people more than others, and you can get very, very, very stiff. And this can cause joint pain, this can cause discomfort, and it's good to move for this kind of thing. And so that's why I always tell people auto-regulate. Figure out what works best for you and stick to that. Nothing else. Little bit of movement, little bit of not moving. Motion is lotion. Usually it's going to be, you know, people are asking, should I do one day off or should I do two days of just very slight movement? Why don't you do one day off and one day of very slight movement? You'll probably find that works better than anything else. That's like my average kind of like... breakout for rest and recovery days for most people, just like on average, it tends to work. All right, handful more. What's the appropriate volume and intensity reduction for time crunched athletes doing like 10 hours per week or less? I assume they mean for a recovery week. So where I've kind of talked about this a little bit so far. So where would you come down on this? I think it depends. depends on what you've done recently in terms of just how much extra rest you're going to need in that recovery week. But generally, the general principles of what a recovery week look like is you're usually going to almost completely back off the intensity. You might bring it back at the end of the week, but you're certainly not going to do it at the start of the week. And you're also going to drop off your ride durations, especially at the start of the week. And then when I have people do it, they just come back up. as you get to the weekend, so they can enjoy that again. For the most part, if you look at, say, your Monday to Friday, and then just imagine what happens if I do 75% less each day compared to what I did previously, that's probably going to end you up in a nice little, what's the opposite of a progression? Regression. A deprogression. Regression. There we go. Where you've successfully reduced the volume, you've also taken the intensity out and you've given yourself the chance to actually bring yourself back to some sort of fitness. And the reason like that sort of scaling works is if you go from, let's say you're doing, let's say some, I don't know, let's say you're doing five hours in the weekdays if you're only doing 10 hours a week, I'll assume you're doing five at the weekend. That usually means you're going to get back to like, a couple of 30-minute recovery rides, a couple of one-hour endurance rides, and a day off. And guess what? That's your recovery week is already built. Whereas if you're one of these 20, 25-plus hour athletes, you're dropping back to four hours throughout the start of the week, maybe another hour at the end of it or an hour at the start. But the volume is severely depleted from what came before. But the relative difference in terms of like You know, how much the cutback's actually probably going to end up being quite similar. It's just that they do so much more that they have to cut it back. If you're like a very low volume athlete, if you're doing four hours a week, you know, you're probably just going to cut the intensity out and you probably don't need to cut back the volume all that much because you're just not doing enough to begin with. Well, if you're doing four hours a week, chances are your off-bike stress is like sky high. or you're just really busy because you can only do four hours a week or you're doing a lot of other sports or something like that or you're like not that serious of a cyclist in which case I'm going to say you need to prioritize fun as much as balance and progression because a lot of the time on four hours a week unless everything else you're doing is like an aerobic sport four hours a week is you know chances are you're going to stop progressing fairly quickly but if you're doing four hours a week I would also assume You are more recreational in terms of all this stuff. It's not always a safe assumption, but there are exceptions, of course. But yeah, I forgot where I was going with that. But that doesn't matter because we have two more real quick questions left. So how do I know a recovery day was effective? And we've already kind of discussed this, but I bring this up because I want to bring it a step further. And I've said this on the podcast before many times, which is if you take a recovery day and then you feel worse the day after that, odds are you need a lot more recovery. Because if you feel better, like keeping your foot on the gas, there's a very high likelihood that you have very chronic fatigue underlying. that like stress off the body with recovery, your body goes- Your fatigue blanket. Yeah, you pull back that fatigue blanket, the fatigue security blanket, and you go, wow, I'm really fucked. Like, no shit, you are. You need more recovery and not more training. Because most of the time, if you have forgotten what it's like to feel good on the bike, and there's only like, I feel open. or not, and I'm just tired all the time. That is a really bad spot to be in. Really bad. And a lot of the people I consult with, not everybody, I'd say like 30 to 40% are in this spot. And it's really hard for me to see, by the way. It's emotionally taxing for me to look through this training and go, oh my God, what is this person going through? Usually it's not. There was someone you sent me a couple of months ago. who you did a brief consult with beforehand. And when I, it was quite funny, when I eventually met him and got to look through his data myself, I told him a bunch of things that I'd worked out and he was like, oh yeah, Coley said all that. I was like, okay, I feel good about my ability to do my job. But like he was doing all these hard intervals and clearly Feeling pretty tired when I was looking through some of the trends in his data, but he'd also got less fit. There was the most jarring thing was that his fitness had gotten substantially worse from where he had started at the start of the year. And so this is a guy, I think I might have mentioned him in a previous podcast, but we got him ready for his A event, which was a month later, which required doing a lot of good intervals, which he managed to do, and he had a great day. And the thing he did immediately after that? Three weeks off. Like, he's starting back up this coming week in terms of, like, preparing for next season. But had to make sure that he, A, enjoyed the event he did, and B, got to the end of it. C, was able to actually get the recovery that he needs to improve. Now, hopefully, he'll be able to improve quite a bit more because, you know, as we've harped on quite a lot. You have to rest, even if that means a little bit of fitness loss, in order to make the progression, because that energy expenditure in the very long term of a season is a very big ask. It might not feel like you get to this time of year and you just want to keep going and build on it, but if you honestly think in your head about, have I got the energy to keep going without a rest? If you're really honest with yourself, you don't. But yeah, it's difficult sometimes seeing people not taking their rest seriously or struggling to do their rest. That's something we should briefly mention. Some people have genuine reasons for finding rest quite difficult to do. And the best thing you can see is them occasionally managing to do it right. But yeah. I don't envy people that struggle to do it, because often the decision to not rest, the decision to be like me and go full gas sometimes, is one that's born out of things like anxiety, it's born out of things like other mental health issues that make it a struggle to switch off for other reasons, in which case there's... another, you need to find other ways to be able to facilitate that sort of rest. Yeah, and I also think that, I mean, you know, I'm not a psychologist, but I think, I think generally speaking, it's difficult for humans to get into the unknown, and like, you know, things where we are in unfamiliar territory. For a lot of people, rest, especially for more than a couple days, is extraordinarily unfamiliar territory, and it's Terrifying. I was just DMing with somebody on Instagram as a follow-up to one of the questions for the Weekend AMA, and I was looking at their training, and I asked, you know, they're giving me symptoms and stuff, and I'm like, show me some of your training. I look at it, and my next question is, have you ever really taken like a rest week or like a rest between seasons or whatever? Because I'm familiar with The Coaching Company that they're getting the plan from. And I was like, yeah, I don't usually see this company giving people any kind of rest or whatever, ever. It's what we talked about, was it like an hour ago? About sleep and getting into good habits for good sleep and being able to just maintain them as much as possible. And it's the... Difficulty of doing that is much like the difficulty of breaking out your habit of, you know, your structure for cycling. Yeah. Where, you know, if anything, rest is a, you know, we as coaches build rest in as part of that structure, but athletes are not necessarily seeing it as part of the structure. They're seeing it as a break in the structure. And people maybe need to... see those two things as being more interlinked than they otherwise do. Absolutely. I mean, like I said before, because we spend a lot of time thinking about rest more than we do about intervals. Intervals are the easy part. It's like managing all the other stuff. The human aspect, that can be difficult. And I think for a lot of people, dipping their toe into the rest world is a big deal. They're like, oh my god, I haven't had a day off of doing nothing in years. Or even a week, a rest week, the way we've described it, some people could not fathom that kind of thing. And it's scary. Like, I assume it would be genuinely scary, because every time I, like when I'm training and I get to rest or an easy week, I'm like, oh, thank fuck, I am so tired. Like, to give people an idea, so just to pick a random week in this guy who took several weeks off. Monday, recovery ride, Tuesday, he went for a light run, because he's got to do some stuff for work to get ready for that, but it was a 12-minute run, he didn't do much, Wednesday, easy endurance ride, Thursday, another 12-minute run, nothing, Friday, Saturday, Sunday, Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday, both recovery rides, another day off, an endurance ride, an endurance ride he missed, a day off. I think he got sick around that point. So, you know, again, good timing on our part to understand that he needed a rest. But like, you know, when we talk about these periods off, we're not necessarily saying stop riding your bike entirely, but find the other things you enjoy doing and go and be able to do them. Give yourself like, you know, give yourself opportunities to fill that space with something else. Like, your coach is going to help you. Facilitate That. Your legs are going to enjoy being able to benefit from it on the other side of it. But I do understand for people who that is difficult. And maybe there's ways around that. Maybe your recovery period, as you talked about in a very early Watts talk, isn't the three weeks of sporadic riding. It's the... Long, was it? Long, steady, distance-type training of yesteryear, where it's just overwinter, I'm just going to ride my bike quite easily for a long time. And that's going to have more or less the same effect, just on a much slower timescale, and possibly without some of the fitness benefits at the end of it that you'd get from good structure. I remember that episode now. Actually, I think that I got some pushback on that episode, as far as I remember, because One of the things I was saying was that riding your bike easy during your off-season, or like, well, not off-season so much, but like your return to form, like your return to training, is because the drop in intensity can still be really beneficial to recover from. And that's something that I'll do, especially like recovering from a VO2 block. If we're thinking about recovery, like if somebody's still kind of really exhausted and their legs are still sore, like, you know, They finish their block on like Sunday, and then the next Saturday, Sunday, they're still not quite there. I don't want them to take another full rest week, like it's time to get back to riding, but I'm not going to let them ride any harder than feels good. So if like if riding Tempo or Sweet Spot or FTP is the limit of feels good, then we're going to do that kind of regular training and make sure that we can do all the normal progression things that we would normally do. And if that doesn't feel good. Easy Endurance is totally fine, some fun riding, it's time to do that kind of stuff, just have some fun, and as the legs come back, we're going to monitor that and manage the training around that kind of stuff. Yeah, it's like what we talked about in terms of a recovery week being a reflection of how the previous week went, and if the reflection of the recovery week was that you needed more, then guess what, we're going to do more, we're going to just... Do some volume. We're not going to worry about the intensity side of things. We're just going to ride our bikes. Ironically, people who do a lot more volume tend to recover faster also. Who could have thought that good fitness would help with that? But you can absolutely screw yourself by, because we got a bunch of questions in while we've been sitting here blabbing, by the way. I reloaded our questions. But it's all the stuff we've touched on already, because it's like, you know, Should I, like, if I'm super hungry on rest days, should I limit my intake or feed the beast? Like, eat! You know, make sure you're not overdoing it, but like, yeah, you need to eat more than especially if you planned. Should you use strength on recovery days? Like, why do I feel like crap on recovery days? Like, we touched on that. If people, like, I guess, like, the sort of summation of what we've talked about today is, if it sounds like a sensible thing to do in your recovery day. Then it's probably safe to do. But if you felt the need to write into the Empirical Cycling Podcast and ask, is this safe for me to do in my recovery day? Probably not. You're probably looking for an excuse for us to tell you not to do something. Yeah, the number of times people write me and ask for a blessing to do something that I think is dumb is very large. Actually, I really appreciate the audience that we've cultivated, because genuinely, a lot of the questions I get asked are really excellent questions. Everybody out there has got a really good head between their shoulders and a good brain between their ears because some of the shit people ask me, I'm like, oh my God, I never thought of that. Well, I'll gush about our listeners later. Anyway, so do we have any kind of quick, for us, quick kind of thoughts to wrap up how not to screw up your rest weeks and how to do them right? Or Rest Days, even? If you wrote into the Erickson Podcast asking for permission, then you're being denied that permission. Yeah. Feel good. Feel good. That's the number one goal. Yeah. Feel good. Feel rested. And if you are wondering if you feel good, but you need openers, try it. Like, I usually suggest... If you're wondering where your legs are at after a recovery week, if you're good to train or not, do a set of openers or do a warm-up and get ready for a ride and see if your workout or your warm-up or your openers goes well. And if the next day or next two days things suck, more rest. If not, great. You're back to normal and now you know something about yourself that you need openers. Don't restrict yourself to a recovery day. Don't restrict yourself to a recovery week. Take the time that's needed. It doesn't matter how long that is. Get to the point where you can do the next part of the training that you are intending to do. At the high quality. If you have a coach. As high quality as you can. At higher quality as you can achieve, which is hopefully the same quality you're able to achieve 90% of the time. And if you have a coach, whether it's one of us or someone else from another company, Being insistent with them about when you feel good and when you don't. Because one of the worst things that can happen is you don't feel good and you're being made to do something hard where you need to feel good to do it, in which case it's just never going to work. So always be on top. When we talk about good coaching athlete relationships, it's a communication thing. Making sure you're being listened to. The number one thing. Yeah. Unless, of course... The number one thing is... I was going to say, unless of course you can't afford that kind of service because a lot of places charge more for that service. And I know we're a little bit expensive compared to a lot of other places. Well, not, I would say market appropriate for, especially for what we do. But yeah, not everybody gets the luxury of communicating with their coach a lot, but that's one of the things that we do. So to kind of plug the coaching as we wrap this up, you know, we, You know, it's not like we charge one rate for everybody. Like our more experienced coaches charge more. Our less experienced coaches charge less, but everybody does the same service. You will get communication with your coach if you work with us. And if you are not looking for a coaching relationship, email me empiricalcycling at gmail.com and ask for a consultation. I'm here to help. We are all here to help because this is why we do this. We want things to go well for people. Like we don't. We don't want to see you not getting faster. We don't want to see you hating the bike. We don't want to see you quit the sport or anything like that. We want to see you do well. And if you would like to talk to us about doing well or optimizing or whatever it is, like I said before, these are anonymous. So if you feel like you don't need help or you don't want people to know you're getting help, that's totally cool. It's just between us. Shoot me an email and you can talk to us and you can coach with us. We are happy to do anonymous coaching relationships. I've got quite a few clients I cannot speak about in public or even in private, so that's okay. And what else am I supposed to plug at the end of this? Oh, Instagram, at Empirical Cycling, if you want to ask questions for the podcast. Please go do so. Follow me over there. Look for the purple Instagram stories with the question box. Those are the podcast ones. The orange ones are the weekend AMAs. So got a couple more questions than weekend AMAs to get back to when we're done with this. And of course, if you want to support the podcast, empiricalcycling.com slash donate. And if you want to give us a nice rating wherever you listen to podcasts, we appreciate all of that. So thanks everybody for listening and we will see you again in a future episode. 