Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Coleen Moore, and today Kyle's got the day off because we have a special guest for an interview, and it's going to be a really good one. So, of course, as always, please subscribe to the podcast, but mostly share it if you like what we're doing here. We really appreciate everybody sharing the podcast. Thank you so much. All the five-star iTunes ratings are going a long way. Thanks so much for that. Also, we're ad-free, so if you want to support the show with a couple blocks, you can do so at empiricalcycling.com slash donate. We've got some show notes up on the website for today. We've got a couple links. If you have any coaching or consultation inquiries, I've actually had a few roster spots open up recently. So if you want to work with me directly, please email me empiricalcycling at gmail.com. And if you don't want to work with me directly, that's cool. We have a lot of other really excellent and qualified coaches here with us as well. So if you want to consult with us too, that is for athletes, for coaches, for teams, for whoever So please reach out if you want a second opinion or you want to double check on anything like that And of course on Instagram, I am at Empirical Cycling and every weekend I'm doing an AMA in the Instagram stories So come check that out, ask a question or you can just observe and hang out Really appreciate everybody participating in those We've had some really, really good questions lately Thank you all for your thoughtfulness on that kind of stuff Okay, so that brings us to our main topic for today, which is an interview with a coach who has been coaching since about 2006 full-time with CTS. He's got a BS in exercise physiology with a minor in chemistry and coaching. And of course, that is all small potatoes because the main thing is that he's been coaching for a long time with amateur athletes and athletes at the very highest level. if anybody's going to have a really good opinion on the topic that we're going to be talking about today which is rest it's going to be this guy and so he's also the host of the CTS Train Right podcast where I've been a guest a couple times so of course thanks for having me on there if you want to go check that out I'll have a link to it in the show notes and so it's a it's a good podcast they've got some good guests they've got some good interviews and and their host Adam here is a very thoughtful guy so Without further ado, let's get into our main topic today, which is my interview with Adam Pulford of CTS. Why don't we come at this sideways? My favorite ways. For sprints too, right? Sprints, mountain bikes, all those things. Sprints are a critical component of a rest week, aren't they? You have athletes that think that too, huh? I don't coach anybody that I'm aware of who thinks so, but whenever I do a Q&A on the weekends up in the Instagrams, I get at least one question every like once a month. Somebody will ask, is it okay to do sprints during a recovery ride? So what say you? Yeah, what say I? Well, I say that typically when I first start working with an athlete and somebody has this question, I kind of pose it to them and I say, why do you think you need sprints? And they'll typically will go all over the place with some sort of rationale of why they need it in the end. They don't know. It makes them feel better about themselves. So anytime that you don't have a solid answer as to why you do something and you base it in like feel only with a lot of insecurity, it's probably not a great answer. What's the highest level of athlete where that has been an issue? Like what level are they? Really? World Tour? That's fascinating. But again, I think it's in part getting more confidence about the method that you're trying to instill in somebody. Because say if they're a pro tour athlete, they're genetically gifted. And so if they've always done something one way and they've still had success, it's kind of that worst part. But if you can then start to change the method or educate them, you can then make them better. working with a pro tour athlete like you and I have talked about before. Hopefully you just don't mess it up, right? That's part of it. And so it's not that like taking away three sprints on a recovery ride is going to change their game drastically, right? But it's the rationale of why that is. and I think like to answer this in a very roundabout way I remember as a young coach I was talking with coach Craig Griffin he's now national teams coach for I think the Canadian endurance track team or something like that anyway ask him the same question he's like he's like well you're just gonna ruin the purpose of the day recovery is recovery and going back to classic Coggin zones I think we're staying south of 60% of FTP and we're doing that to keep intensity low basically to move the body a little bit not induce any anaerobic stress and just kind of get out the door like I said move the body in an active recovery way and sprints don't fall into that sprints are meant for in some sort of anaerobic adaptation that you're trying to elicit or or some sort of coordinated effort or coordination to actually learn how to sprint. I mean, and then to win bike races and stuff like that. So again, I don't use that on recovery days. I'm pretty much go out, ride your bike, keep it super chill kind of guy. And it makes it better that the plan is simple too, right? Totally. Yeah. I mean, that's where, yeah, I don't know. The longer I coach, the more it's just like whatever I can do to communicate a simple, process to the athlete or communicate a simple workout, that's usually better. Yeah. I mean, in some ways, I feel bad if ever I have to give somebody a workout that they cannot remember as they just roll out of the house. That's a good point. That's a really good point. And I try to do the same thing. And one of my kind of methods of doing that is to write a title of a workout. that is based in the method of what I'm trying to accomplish that actually is descriptive of what the athlete should do. For example, threshold intervals, three by 10 minutes with five minute recovery in between, as opposed to leg crushers or something. Yeah, I do the same thing. My titles are all very simple. FTP, sweet spot over unders. Tempo, fart like tempo, group ride or endurance. It's very simple. Now, when I get fancy, it's when I know that an athlete will be inside pretty much exclusively and I kind of manipulate using Training Peaks, like Schedule Builder. I'll get in some fancy stuff that goes up and down with the percentages and it guides them along if they're going to be on Zwift and they're really into technology. However, if they're going outdoors. I'm going to make it as simple as possible and something that they can read the title of as they forgot to check training peaks on the way out the door and they go, okay, got it. And here's another thing that I get pushback on with the sprints on recovery days thing is they don't burn that many kilojoules and it's mostly like phosphocreatine anyway, right? So what's a couple moles of... creating phosphate between muscle fibers, really. Well, it's nothing. And that's what people need to realize. And so I think what's even more, if you want to go, you know, the biochemical route and the physiological route, you can go deeper than I can in that regard. But I think that there's a psychological aspect of it that I'd want to touch on, which is, again, why when somebody asks me sprints on recovery days, I say, well, why? Yeah. Because you start to uncover more, right? Because if you say, well, I need it, why do you need it? Yeah. And I really like that you turn it around on people because if somebody says something like that to me, usually I go right for the biochem. And not only that, I'll go right for the peak performance. You're not going to have good sprints because you are now tired. And if you want to have good... High Power, like a minute and shorter efforts. Typically, you need to be really well rested and you're not going to get that rest by doing those efforts while you're supposed to be resting. That's it. And that's kind of where I was going with the whole aspect of it. Then you start asking questions, right? And you kind of walk them into the rationale where it's like, well, if it's recovery miles, you're probably tired. say coming off of whatever I just gave you the weekend before, the day before, like the whole idea is recovery. It's not to hit some sort of deep anaerobic thing. So if you are tired and we're trying to hit some deep anaerobic, it's going to be subpar. If it's subpar, we're not going to get the training effect that we really would get out of a very good sprint effort. And so you're only going to make yourself more tired and therefore you kind of ruin the day, so to speak. Yeah. And, you know, that kind of is starting to get to something else I wanted to touch on, which is when people are starting to get tired and their performance is starting to take a hit, how often do you see somebody who thinks I should push harder now because I'm losing performance and now I have to train harder? Yeah, again, it's like I do see that a lot in... with people in like observation, people maybe on the group ride or when you first start working with an athlete. Hopefully they're not doing that, you know, three years into working with them, you know, that kind of thing. Yeah, well, because I mean, coaches like you and me, we like to give people the agency to, you know, do that. Because, you know, if they text us on a ride, odds are we're not going to see that text for a little bit. Right. knowing that they can make the right decision for themselves that we would have told them to make is kind of a goal of working long term with a coach like us, right? Exactly. And I think I realized Tim Cusick and I were kind of doing the same thing in our training, in our prescriptive kind of coaching methods, but he had a far better term for it. I would like... create weekly goals for the athlete on training peaks and I would say intensive threshold development and what that means is if you're feeling better go ahead and give me more power even if it's a little bit above the zone and then on days where maybe you're not feeling so good kind of stick within zone try to finish that workout so with the end goal of trying to increase your FTP he calls that in terms of educating the athlete's self-determined training. When you're out there on the road trying to communicate or having the coach communicate to the athlete what the goal is when stuff changes. Yeah. So what's the first thing that you see? Well, okay, let's go from this angle. On average, about how often would you give somebody a rest during the week? What's the ratio of... Recovery Days to Workout Days. And I know it depends, but like, you know, what does it depend on? And what are those ratios typically? Yeah, it's a good question. And it's been of mind as I'm kind of like reviewing my own kind of process. And I'd say straight up recovery days, it will depend on how intense we are going, how much, say, racing we're doing, or if we are like in this intensive phase. really deep or if we're doing really intense training I'll probably have at least two days of either off the bike completely or recovery mile sort of ride and that's probably even going to be three depending on how we're going to talk about easy rides or recovery rides because we'll get there but I think even like a 90 minute endurance ride going out and riding how you feel for some folk it's not moving the needle on fitness therefore it's not It's not true recovery, but it's not building anything. Therefore, I quantify it as easy. I prescribe quite a lot of those rides, especially during the week. Even if somebody doesn't have that much time to ride, like somebody's got one to two hours, three or four days a week to ride, you can't use all of them as interval days, right? No. I mean, straight up, where I kind of start is like, how many intense days do I have? I'll usually say three and the rest are easy to endurance depending on if I'm trying to really build some CTL. So there you go. So seven minus three equals four. What about how often do you think people need recovery weeks? Like on average, typically. How about during a build phase? Because I know it changes a little bit for like a taper and a race phase. Yep. Yep. Yeah, yeah, yeah. This is a good one. And actually I've got, I let you know that I was kind of developing a podcast based on this a little bit too. And I think it's good because people are, people are thinking about this, right? And they're also thinking about it in different ways. And so how often would I do it? I would say in a stock general format. I would have a recovery block every three to four weeks to play it safe. And that block, it's not a week. It's going to be more like four days. Just going easy, making sure we're nice and kind of recovering. Then we get back to work is what I say. In that three to four weeks, meaning like, and it kind of comes off of what we were talking about with some periodization and whatnot, where, you know, three weeks up and one week down. I mean, that rhythm does work for a lot of people. So, you know, listeners listening to this, I think three to four weeks is okay to do if you're trying to, you know, coach yourself into this and then start to also, you know, inquire. Do I really need seven days of complete, say, rest or easy rides? Typically, no. If you're sleeping all right, eating healthy, and sleeping all right means, you know, seven to eight, nine hours of sleep per night. I mean, really good sleep, eating healthy, getting adequate substrate or calories into your body. And you also have like a job that's very medium stress or at least physically, you know, you're sitting in front of a computer and you're soaking up all the rest all day, right? Not too stressed. You can get away with that. When I'm really building fitness with people who have time and whatnot, I mean, I'll drag that ramp rate out for a couple months before I really turn down the, or turn up the recovery, I should say. Yeah, well, because after a couple months, you know, somebody's ready for a taper and a peak, right? Mm-hmm. Yeah, straight up, like, I don't know, somebody doing Spring Classics right now. You know, we've been... building for three months for that, right? Now it's a little bit of a, you know, recovery, peak and taper in their bike racing right now. Similar to, you know, anybody doing some of the early season, like gravel races, that kind of stuff. I mean, hopefully, you know, January, February was just grindy, sticky training, you know, March, maybe you freshen up with a little bit of anaerobic and then you're off to the races to mid-south or something like that. And away we go. What are some signals that you find during a training block that makes you think we need to rest earlier than planned? Yeah, that's the golden nuggets right there. So three things maybe that pop into my head are failed workouts. Athlete failed to accomplish the workout. comments on training. And so that's just standalone. Okay. Cause you don't know anything until you can make up all the stories you want as a coach, but you got to call the athlete or text him, right? Why did this happen? Comments on training peaks. And this is what I try to get my athletes to do because whether, whether I'm reading them or not, it helps them. to, it's a bit of a diary, right? To tell the story or reflect on what they're doing. I try to read every comment on Training Peaks every week. Sometimes I don't, I'll be real honest. I do the same thing every day. Yeah. Every day. Yep. Exactly. Exactly. And so like I'll go, you know, I'll catch up on an athlete kind of like every day, so to speak, but like every week I'm like, okay, did I read all of this? Did I read all that? Because I do want to know that those comments on Training Peaks are probably more important. now than ever to me I used to be like heavy in the power and be like oh yeah just look at oh you can do that more but the qualitative information is that that's what we're talking about in terms of you know the words expressed about how the workout went so when I see qualitative information of that was that was hard to do today and it would say it's a three by ten threshold It's not that hard of a workout, right? Everybody should be able to do that even if they're tired. Yeah, exactly. Even with some training load in the legs, three by ten should physiologically be not spreading someone too thin. So if I see comments like that on a workout like that, red flag goes up, coach calls athlete, coach texts athlete to investigate a little bit more. Yeah, no, I completely agree with you on the comments. And I was talking to somebody yesterday at a race and, you know, she's self-coached. And I actually told her to look to, you know, keep comments for herself and read them back at the end of the week or the end of the training block. And you have a different perspective on them for yourself if you are self-coached, if you have a couple days perspective. And then you can start to see patterns that you really have a hard time seeing in the moment. And that's what we're there for is we can more easily triangulate in the moment because we're a little more objective. And, you know, we've got all kinds of heart rate data. We've got power data. And then we've got athlete subjective feedback. We can check training peaks. Are they stressed? Are they sick? Do I know this person's moving? And then with all that information, you know, if somebody finishes a workout. and they're going, okay, yeah, I technically, I finished that workout. Everything's in order, but you see the RPE for a three by 10 at FTP is a 10. Yeah. Something's up. Something's up. Yeah. And, and hopefully, so hopefully you can stay ahead of that, right. By either walking them through and say it's, say it's, you know, hard three or four day block. And then that three by 10 comes after. You know, 60 minutes each day or something silly like that, you know, where you're really trying to build somebody. And you can say, hey, you're going to feel real bad on this, but just get through it. Okay. Then that qualitative information is predictive and okay, all good. Now we rest. Okay. Or if somebody's moving. You don't give them an aggressive training block at that time period, right? So staying ahead of the game is super helpful. I think that's logical. But the other thing that I'd say, what do I look for when someone is spread thin like that? It's not so much heart rate either. I mean, it's probably like if I see that they're doing extra you know 20% every single day they're just like adding in more time or more intensity and I see that pattern or trend I'll check in with them because hey your ramp rates pretty high right now you know you're good for you you're adding more that's great how are you feeling you know that kind of thing so I get a little leery if someone all of a sudden is outside the norm of you know trying to do more reach a little bit higher because you know you know what's coming. Do you have any in-workout markers for the athletes like RPE and stuff? Because I typically use, like how does your threshold feel? Does it feel like threshold? Okay, you're probably doing all right. Does it feel harder than threshold today? Okay, that's a sign that something's off. Or like, you know, if somebody's staring at their power meter from the first five minutes of an effort. you know, threshold effort, sweet spot effort, you know, that's a bad sign. That should be like the last five minutes of the workout, not the first five. Yeah. Yeah, totally. Um, so let's just assume it's a typical athlete where I'm not there with them. Um, what am I looking for say after the fact? Yeah. Right. Okay. Yeah. RPE is, is like first and foremost, we're always, as we talked about in one of our conversations like matching the RPE with whatever the goal is for the workout. Let's call it threshold three by 10. Again, that should feel like a seven, maybe going on eight. You know, if you're reaching for the upper end of that and if we're hitting nines and tens bad, right? If we're hitting, um, you know, lower, okay, well, why is that power meter calibrated? Blah, blah, blah. And so that's what I'm looking at. Say, I say after the fact within the workout itself, I have some people that say, well, my heart rate was My heart rate was pegged and I just felt hard all day, but they were producing normal power. And I'll look back and say, well, it's because you took three days off the bike, right? Heart rate is, heart rate's flying higher during that time period. And it's typically because Do you have any other markers for... somebody being ready to come back to training? Or on the other side, do you have any markers that say this person needs more rest? Yeah, those are really good questions. So things I'm looking for when someone comes off a recovery block before they're ready to train. I, again, I go back to qualitative information. If I do my typical like four or five day recovery block, and foremost working individuals and like listeners of this podcast is probably going to be like Monday off, Tuesday recovery, Wednesday endurance, Thursday endurance, Friday off. I'll check in with him on Friday and I'll be like, hey, how are you feeling? Have you been sleeping? Have you been taking care of yourself? Yeah, I see that, you know, stuck to the parameters, all recovery endurance work. How are you feeling? Be like, I'm ready to go coach. I'm right. I'm a little antsy. Perfect. Nancy is good. Great. Group ride tomorrow. Let's roll. So that feeling of like, Nancy, I want to, I want to make some Watts. I want to just, you know, get after it. That's what I'm looking for. And that's what I want. Like, as opposed to say the same situation, the same rhythm and pattern for an athlete. And I call them up on Friday and say, all right, you know, I see, you know, you got in the rides and how you feeling? It's like, oh man, stressed out. Why? Well, you know, my kid hasn't been sleeping. I think we got COVID. I have this extra work on my plate. I don't know if I can get a ride in tomorrow even. Is my fitness going to go down? It's like, no. You know, that situation, right? And we've all been there. But that person's not ready to train. You know, you just need to get some rides back, get some rhythm back, get them sleeping, and then we can train again. Yeah. You know which one I've noticed the most is sprint power. like a five second sprint, like just two or three after a rest block. If those are looking good and they're feeling good, that is always a good sign. Yeah, that's a good point. I'd say, especially for like sprinter phenotypes, all arounders, that's a pretty good sign. My climbers were always, they'll do 800 watts. Yeah, all day, every day, no matter what. Beginning of the race, end of the race, 800 watts, 900 watts. 800, yeah. So yeah, that's a really good, and that's, and I think, I mean, you're kind of more of a little bit of the expert on this, but like, my question to you is, why is that? I definitely see that in my athletes, and I... When you go back to how all the systems work and especially like the upper end system that does get suppressed through endurance training, when that gets unsuppressed, the spunkiness starts to happen and they have good sprint. But you can go deeper if you want on that. The spunkiness, I like that. You know, I think it's... It's funny, I just explained this to somebody earlier on a call. So I think the way I would TLDR it is if you are fatigued, you have probably a couple things against you in terms of making big watts. The first is obviously you probably have low muscle glycogen stores. and the muscular stress of training is very high and your muscles need to repair themselves in order to have full contractile apparatus like firing on all cylinders. The other thing is that there's a lot of central fatigue and so the nervous system actually does get quite fatigued with a long training block like I don't do much riding anymore and every time I go ride I am more exhausted than if I've done like heavy deadlifts. like mentally, neurally. And that takes some time to come back from. And nerves, they're not exactly a rapidly proliferating cell type. And so they seem to need a lot more time to rest and repair. And also not only that, but when we are training hard, we have so many stress hormones in our bodies that that it seems like the nervous system and the muscles both seem to downregulate the cell surface receptors. Like they'll internalize them. They'll grab them from the cell surface and bring them to the endoplasmic reticulum, the rough endoplasmic reticulum or the smooth one. Anyway, it doesn't matter. I forgot. Oh, the rough has all the ribosomes on it. The R stands for rough and ribosomes. Don't forget that for your cell bio class. Check, check, double check. So all this stuff. adds into you cannot make great power. And, you know, it can actually be a sign of overtraining or underfueling as well during a long block. And if somebody should be recovering and their sprint power is not quite coming up where we think it should be, sometimes a sign of underfueling, sometimes a sign of underresting. And so, yeah, especially for sprinters who want to make that, you know, those big watts, that 1600 watt sprint, that 1800 watt sprint, you know, backing off on the training is a good way to do that. And when somebody's feeling good, they'll, you know, they'll match their PR for 20, 30 seconds, you know, when they're starting to fully recover. So, you know, yep. And I think what's One thing that I see in training, and then I'll share a quick story, which kind of elucidates this even further. I really like it when those sprinter phenotypes, or even the all-arounders, after they come off a recovery block and get into normal training, then they start to rattle off these peak powers of the year, maybe even all-time, without even trying. They jump in the group ride, they go for the sprint. It's like, whoa, coach, I'm feeling good. That's what I'm looking for. That's when I know we're going good. Real quick, this concept of recovery and maybe even how the central nervous system works and I would say the ATP-PCR system or phosphate system. My exercise physiology professor in college, he was a president of the AACSM at the time. and Carl Foster was his name. And he shared a story and the guy, he'd have stories for everything. This is one that he was a marathoner and he'd pretty good marathoner too. And he had some good friends that were two and a half hour, sorry guys, I'm pretty fast, but not Olympic. And so they were exercise phys, PhDs and still running and all this kind of stuff. And they were at ACSM and lean, right? Still training, still racing in like, 15 years go by, everybody has kids and all this kind of stuff, and now they're 30, 40 pounds overweight. Well, before all that, they're at this ACM conference and they're like, let's test vertical leap. And they're like, okay, what's up? So they're, again, marathon runners. They're jumping and it's just terrible, right? They can't jump at all. 10, 15 years go by, they have kids, they got 40, 50 pounds extra on them, and they're sitting around drinking again and they're like, hey, let's test that vertical. Jump again. So they go and do that and everybody were like 50% or more higher in their vertical leap even though that they were like 50 pounds heavier than before with no training. Like all they were doing is sitting in classrooms and all this kind of stuff. And when I tell my athletes like that story when we're talking about like sprint training and how it all works and all this kind of stuff, it's like it's a totally like different system here. Like especially when we're trying to uncover it. Right. So this endurance training, I mean, it really suppresses, you got to do it, especially if you're, you know, your race is over 30 seconds, right? But, uh, um, so you have to do it. I'm not saying to all the sprinters out there, don't do your endurance training, but the. The balance of everything in bringing it out at the right time. That's some of the artistry that comes out in the coaching that I get really excited about personally. Yeah. And actually, that makes me think of two more things that will affect your peak power and the big sprint watts. The first thing is that, well, if you've taken 20 years off of running, You have actually probably built a good deal of fast twitch fibers since you were doing all that marathon training and those will have a faster contraction rate and they'll be able to produce more force. And the other thing is that like a five second sprint, it's actually a good deal glycogen use. And when you get into those large motor units, they seem to take a lot longer to recover. than the smaller ones that are well-trained. And so, you know, it could take some time for those things to really rebuild their glycogen stores. And if you are running on empty, you know, you're not going to be able to make big watts. And that's one of the canaries in the coal mine that I have for my athletes is how do you feel when you're accelerating? How do you feel coming away from a stoplight or like going upstairs even? Yeah, those are good qualitative information. inquiries there for sure. Yeah. If somebody says I'm sprinting up the stairs, it's like, all right, yeah, time to get back to work. Yep. Yeah. No, that, that's exactly it. And, you know, as I sit here in like observe our conversation in our listeners, probably listening to this too, they're before, you know, we get, we geek out on a lot of, you know, tech and, and, and physiology and all this kind of stuff, but what we're talking about, we're, we're listening a lot. Yep. We're listening to our athletes and making sure that they're ready to go again. And I think if the listeners can hear that and learn anything from this episode, it is to listen to your body with a very unbiased opinion of, am I ready to go or am I not? And the reason is because when you're ready to go, it's time to train again. And when you train, you got to go quality. Go Deep because wherever you're going next has to be to the next level of what you did before in order to improve. So you have to be ready to go hard, deep, and away we go. You can't do that if you're just medium. I completely agree. But so many people get that wrong because they're like, oh man, I need to get my... my 90 minutes in or whatever. Yeah. Well, that's like group ride fitness, right? It's like it'll get you from the couch to a good level of fitness, but you're not going to get past it because you're always going kind of hard, but you're never really targeting anything that will get you faster in the long run. It's like as specific as specific work can be, right? It's like if you just race or you group ride. Okay, but, you know, are you working your VO2max? Not really. Are you working your endurance? Not really. Are you working your threshold? Not really. You're working repeatability? Great. You're working on your group skills. Some people really need that. Great. But, you know, it's part of a balanced plan. And figuring out what everybody needs, that's, you know, that's part of what we do too. Yeah. Yeah, that's it entirely. And so kind of back to that is just like, I think when you're doing a good job of taking comments, whether it's on training peaks or you got your own thing or whatever, go back and then look at those trends as well. Look at the trends of when you're producing your best power and what you're saying in your comments, right? And you'll figure out a little bit more of how you produce your best power. Timing, what your ramp rate was or what your TSB perhaps was. Or if you can overlay it with a bit of a food journal, you can see what kind of food stuff you need in order to produce really good training. Yeah, that's actually a really good observation. And I think on some level, the restructuring of what's planned based on how you're doing is actually something that a lot of people are almost scared to do. because if you're following a pre-written plan or if you're writing your own plan, there is always that pressure like, I got to get back to work. Yeah, because people, I think, especially if they've had success, that can also be the Achilles heel. If you're the king of the group ride, why change? Because group rides are all that matter. Races don't matter anymore. But, you know, why change? Why change the process? Why work harder when I don't have to? I mean, humans are lazy. I mean, biologically, like, we are lazy. We want normal. We don't want to, you know, spend more than we have to in order to have our balance in life and sustain, right? Well, I mean, I think cyclists, by and large, are a group of people that are the exception that proves the rule. How many cyclists do you know are way more motivated than the average person? And our job is more to hold them back than to get them to work hard. It's true. However, I'll press in a little bit on that one and say everybody's stoked to go climb some hills, do a group ride, but when it's time to do VO2. See what I'm saying? I see what you're saying. I do have a handful of people who love VO2s. I know. My point for the listeners who maybe didn't get that is most people want to stay fit, right? Because fitness feels good, you get endorphins and all this kind of stuff. But once you're, I don't know, 80 to 100 CTL and... you know you're climbing well and you're hitting the group rides and all this kind of stuff oh that's good enough maybe right and okay I need an extra hour in order to improve or whatever but it's usually vo2 that can help to move the needle from a lot a lot of people and it really hurts bad and that's why most people they're like nah vo2 Right? Or they won't let go of their group ride in order to do the VO2 because the group ride is super fun. The VO2 sucks. And in the end, it's like, ah, do I really need to do that? It's like, well, and that's what I'm saying about get really well rested in order to train really super hard in order to make the gains. Yeah. And one last thing I'll say is like, you ain't doing VO2 very often or multiple cycles through, but when you do it well, During a great time period, when you're well rested, you don't need much to get the improvement out of it. Yeah, that's true. And, you know, to think about it on the recovery side, you know, a lot of people don't want to give up their group ride to take an easy day, which would also lead to big improvements. Like, I mean, I'm thinking about titling this episode, why not working out is the most effective workout. Why is that? Why indeed? I mean, obviously you can't not work out for a year and go, wow, I'm really fit. Unless you're Carl Foster in training for your vertical leap. Unless you're Carl Foster training your vertical leap, for sure. No, I think a lot of the time people forget how crucial it is to rest because they haven't felt rested in forever. and a lot of people have what I have called on the podcast before the fatigue security blanket like it and and you know that little bit of rest that you get and you go okay that's good enough all right I'm back to it somebody is listening to me talk right now just give me a look because she's feeling a little called out wonder who that could be yeah I mean so many times People listen to a podcast and they go, why don't you just at me, bro? The answer is I don't because there are too many people to at. Yeah, there's a lot of ats that could be had. But to echo your point, because you're spot on, right? And I think, and you say, well, why is that? Go back to, and we've talked about general adaptation syndrome or the gas principle, whatever it's called, by Hans Elie, where stress plus rest equals adaptation. and what so so he's a biologist that was looking at how can I manipulate organisms to have something else that they didn't have before and so the stress is training in and the rest is doing nothing or letting that organism or the cell or whatever respond to the training and then form an adaptation in the context of endurance training right we're talking about say Training Threshold, right? We can train threshold intensively and we can see improvements in threshold. But people are so focused, including like coaches and podcasting and all this kind of stuff. We're focused on training because it's like a thing that we do. We can feel it and you can manipulate and there's all these thoughts and theories and methods under the sun and everybody's got their own thing. And so that's the focus. The rest is not sexy. The rest is you can't really feel it necessarily at the time. I would argue that you could feel it over time if you get it dialed in really well. Agreed. And it's not on Instagram. No one takes a picture of themselves sleeping and is like, crushed it, bro. Except those quiz-up ads from a couple years ago where they all had pillows. Oh yeah, that's true. And like Team Sky as well. I mean, they were probably throwing out some pillow grams too. I don't know. And Aura these days, I guess you could like screenshot your sleep score and be like, crushed you totally. I've seen people doing that with the whoop scores. Yeah, could do that. So I think, you know, what's cool about some of those wearables is that it is bringing awareness to recovery for a lot of people. However... We may have even talked about this, how it is not there yet in terms of let's hang our hat on that and decide what training is for today. I think it brings awareness to like, oh, I need to drink less, sleep more, and stay off my phone. Stay off my phone. Yeah, exactly. And then people, and then, you know, that's great for a couple of days and then people are like, yeah, I can work a little bit more or whatever. So yeah, rest is, gosh, I've said this so many times. People have been looking for, The Fountain of Youth, The Silver Bullet. Sleep. Sleep. Fucking sleep. Can I say that on your podcast? You can say whatever the fuck you want. Oh, okay. Great. But sleep, man. When an athlete comes to me with all these problems and says, how much are you sleeping? Five or six hours a night? And they go, that's fine. I'm doing great. For sure. And so to your point, okay, now, once I start to get an athlete to sleep, More, doesn't matter, just more, but let's say in the seven to nine hour realm, then they start to feel different. They start to feel better. They start to feel refreshed. They're like, oh, this is good. And then they start to train better. And then you bring contrast to their training, i.e. rest days and easy days. And then they start to go harder on the hard days. Then they get trained and then they start to feel it. And that's where I think your security blanket of fatigue or whatever, you can feel that in their little is apprehensive to let it go because it's the training and training always makes us better mentality and they don't want to let go of that 40 TSS on the recovery day that would keep them up above 100 or something. I don't know what the hell they're thinking. My favorite analogy too is lifting weights because lifting weights is a very binary way to train. You either lifted it or you did not. Ones and zeros. Ones and zeros. And so if you are... Lifting weights properly to get stronger or bigger or whatever, you're going to be pretty tired at the end of that day. And it's like, you can't just do another set later that day. And you can't just do the same workout the next day or sometimes even the day after that. And you have this very definite, all right, I added weight or I added reps. Something like threshold training, sometimes you can't add quote-unquote weight because your threshold hasn't gone up, but you can do more time in zone. And so you've got that going for you. But without the rest, you don't get to adapt. Like if your time in zone is going down, like one day you do 40 minutes and you do 2x20, great. Now you do 3x15, you were trying to add 5 minutes, and now this time you do 30 minutes and then you... Get five minutes in your next interval. Now you've done 35 minutes, which is less than 40 minutes. You are not recovered yet. You should be doing more and you are doing less. So there's all sorts of stuff like that. But like I said, weightlifting is a great analogy because you have to rest and everybody knows you have to rest and everybody knows you can't really lift super heavy more than like two or three times a week for the same muscle group. Yeah, it's a great analogy. However, I think the... The issue we run into is kind of like, you can butcher me all you want here, but it's like two different energy systems, right? If I'm lifting weights, I'm using one system that gives me immediate feedback versus, say, the aerobic system where there's a lot of gray area, right? You can go kind of hard, but you're not producing... Ton of force relative to what you're doing in the gym. Yeah. Right. But, but it's cardiovascular endurance. Like we're meant to kind of go all day on that. And that's where it can be that mushy middle of sorts. Whereas, you know, the higher you go in that aerobic realm, I mean, it's going to cost you a lot, but if you got enough willpower, I mean, hell, you can really suffer through some crazy couple weeks or a month of punching through training, man. Yeah. Well, and that's like, that's the black hole of middle intensity, isn't it? I would say yes for sure especially which is you know the is that the polarized thing is that where it came from or was that just triathletes always kind of riding middle intensity and triathletes for sure explain them yeah yeah sorry triathletes I know you listen we love you but sometimes I used to be a triathlete a triathlete folks um so I can say that um I yeah probably polarized I mean I'm a um I'm a big fan of polarized training for a specific reason and time period. It works for sure. Sweet spot training, I think that's maybe where the middle training and some people got hot on that for a minute. But yeah, probably polarized. Said that sweet spot was bad and that's medium. Whatever. They're all different training modalities. But I would say I'll twist it around on you a little bit there, Koli, and say If you have an athlete who punches through that much training, gets super, super, like, drastically tired after a month of sweet spot every single day. Okay, let's say... If you get to rest for a week, they might be flying. That's fair. If. If. You know, because, well... Maybe like two weeks. Yeah, maybe two weeks. Maybe. Maybe. Maybe. If the training was effective, because sometimes it's not. For sure, yeah. For sure. I mean, I've had a lot of coaching and creation people who have done a lot of sweet spot stuff and they come to me and they're like, I've plateaued. They've done all the right training, they've done all the right resting too. So it's complicated. Yeah, I mean, it is complicated. I'm not a huge, I mean, I'm not a, I don't even use the word sweet spot, by the way. I kind of don't like it. So I typically don't use a tempo or threshold for me. just saying uh time and place for that too but like you said if it's not effective whatever we're kind of getting off the whole rest focus time or like the rest focus of this podcast but I think it's super important because people will get baited in by that middle call it tempo threshold sweet whatever because it does it feels good and you can do a lot of it and it burns a lot of calories right and that's where I see the is a security blanket of fatigue wrapping people, especially like hill climbers, nice and warmly because 2,000 kilojoules for you today. You have been burritoed in your fatigue security blanket. For sure. You can have all the burritos. Actually, you kind of got to another question I wanted to talk about, which is... During a race block, for instance, because you coach a lot of pros, I coach a lot of pros, people have a lot of time to train, retired folks too, or grad students, for instance. So when somebody's in a hard race block, they've done a lot of good training and now they are needing to recover from all the racing that they're doing. How do you structure the rest in between that? Because what I'm getting to is can you still do some recovery while doing like a four or five hour endurance ride? Especially if you're used to some volume like that. So what it takes to stay fit is not the same thing it takes to get fit. Dean Gollich. That's a quote from Dean Gollich. And so the reason I bring that up right now is because if we built up a race engine, right, and we're sitting, I don't know, between 100 and 130 CTL or something, to maintain that with some race blocks in there, you've built a body or an engine that can tolerate on average, you know, a hundred to 130. You've been averaging that for the past 42 days of 50, a month and a half. Okay. And so when you do ride four hour rides that, well, first of all, when you do a 90 minute ride, uh, that is like around 70, that's not building your fitness. Okay. So it's, it's kind of bringing you, you say it's not bringing you down, but it's, it's not increasing the ramp rate. Therefore it's not really inducing too much fatigue. all good if you race super hard that's a pretty stressful day physically psychologically and all it has some ramifications there so you got to keep that in consideration but you can take time off very well and kind of get a nice little boost after that race from the intensity that's induced there and also you can come in do a four-hour ride that's going to be I don't know probably like 160, 180. That's like easy for that CTL. And it's not going to cost you too much because you built up such an engine, right? So that can be a really, for my time, rich folk that, you know, for a ride, just go out, find a burrito along the way and enjoy your life. It can be a very like relaxing way to, you know, Yeah, you know, get in a good ride, enjoy some sunshine, get in some fitness and that kind of thing. I don't know if that's exactly where you're going. But yeah, for a ride doesn't always have to be like pinning it to win it. Yeah, I was actually just thinking, where was I going with that? So I guess it was more like, where's the balance between recovery and maintenance? Yeah. Again, like you're getting into that, like. It depends territory, and I kind of hate the answer. I love the gray area, though, and I love thinking about what does it depend on. Because everything is so different, and I think a lot of people during race blocks, they're still training really hard. So let's say somebody's got three weeks, they're racing both days each weekend to let them recover and to maintain fitness. and race hard the next weekend. How do you structure that week? Yeah. Say that like, and then let's assume that everything was like perfect and flawless. They're eating well, they're sleeping well, low stress. What do you got? So this is actually where like a polarized model comes in pretty good. I keep the hard days, hard, easy days, easy race days are hard and there's two of them in the week. So I'll probably give one hard day midweek and the rest are easy. and that's going to be that has been has treated me well as a coach in terms of maintaining sharpness physically a little a little I want to get after it mentally and still keep the feel of the legs and not overdo it. Does that make sense? That's exactly what I do. So perfect. It's like we've all kind of, you know. We've all, what is it called, where different branches of species evolve the same solution. Like eyes have evolved like what, 15 different times or something like that. Convergent evolution, I think. It makes sense. I have no idea. I used to love evolutionary bio and I'm really embarrassed. I don't remember the term. You should be embarrassed. I do remember allopatric versus sympatric speciation for some weird reason. Can I say one quick thing that I've had ever since you sent the email of the thing? Because all this thing on rest. This is a good little hack for any listeners, especially masters level, age groupers, whatever. If you're feeling cracked, take a rest day off on the weekend. Take Sunday off. It's not... It's not just the Lord's day. It can be your day too, Koli. Sorry, can I say that on your podcast? Yeah, God bless. So what I mean by that is like so many of us are chasing miles and Saturday, Sunday just has to be these long, because I ain't working and I got to get all my fitness in and all this kind of stuff. Man, you take a Sunday off? You come into Monday? You're ready to go. Way better than taking, like, say, Monday or Wednesday or whatever in terms of a rest day. And you're dealing with work, you're dealing with the kids, you're dealing with all this stuff. I mean, it's not good rest. If you can take one complete weekend day off, man, it's like taking three days off. I agree. I have a couple clients where they always have, like, a Saturday or a Sunday off. on a Monday through Friday or whatever your work schedule is. You've got to get up and get up early so you're sleeping less. You've got stress. Your food schedule is a little weird. If you can just chill for a whole day, whoever gets to do that? Almost never. It's gold. Gold. Absolute gold. Draw the line in the sand that day too. Have it planned out because I think when you think you're going to get a ride in and say it's Sunday or whatever, You think it's like, oh, I could get a ride in. I couldn't. It has that like vibrating anxiety throughout the day. And then you're like, oh, screw it. It's already five o'clock. I'm not going to ride way better to just say I ain't riding a day. Yeah, I agree. Yeah. Okay. So my last question for you, how often do you see somebody has terrible legs after they've had a good rest? And it takes them a couple of days to open up. Yeah, so this is a great question. I would say, if I'm working with an athlete, say a year plus, right? I've worked out all the kinks and we got to know each other, right? Very rarely do I have somebody have bad legs after a recovery block. What's bad is the perceived effort's high, heart rate is high, and everything feels harder. if I don't have a day to blow things out or some openers or something like that, a day of intensity before we get into racing mode or whatever. For training, I don't really care. You can feel terrible if you want. It's training. But for the race, I think that feel is more important. So does that make sense just in terms of that scenario? Oh, completely, yeah. No, because it's funny, you're right, because I remember... The first time I ever noticed this or thought about it, I had a new client. He said, you know, my goal this year is like GMSR. And last year I went into it and I did a lot of resting. And, you know, that first race day I had bad legs. The second race day I had bad legs. Third race day I was starting to come around. And I looked at his numbers and I was like, you had great legs. They just didn't feel good. And so, but that perception of the feeling of the legs is crucial because it's going to determine your decision making in the race. 100%. So this is where, this is probably another deanism as well, but feeling and performance are not the same thing. And this is why power meters for cyclists are really important or pace for runners or whatever. Because if you say the athlete says terrible, like. I'm going to hang it up, whatever. It's like, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. You just hit your peak 90 minute power ever. Of course you felt terrible. Like no one wants to feel that way. However, when you're, so sometimes when you're going the hardest you've ever gone, especially for a long period of time, you're on an unexplored territory. You're going to feel terrible, right? Especially if you're a little loaded up from some recovery and all this kind of stuff. And then, so some people say, well, no, how about the day I set a PR and I was just totally in the flow and all. Well, sure. That can happen too. Yeah. Right. But oftentimes I do think that when somebody is, you know, well-trained, well-rested, and then they come like, God, I felt terrible. Very rarely do I see them produce poor power. But they're not feeling that great. And you can't overlook that as a coach because then it gets into decision making and willpower, right? Some people give up. Hopefully they don't. But then they're focused on, you know, not dying and not drinking and eating. And that's a problem. Yeah. Especially the not dying part. Well, yeah, it's step one in living. Yeah. Wow. That's deep. So I think you're absolutely right. Somebody will set, or I'll look at DFRC in WKO5. They'll be like, man, I felt terrible today. I didn't have good legs. And I'll look at it and I'll be like, I know DFRC is not an amazing thing. It's not the best ever. But if it's at negative eight kilojoules, like 30 minutes into the race, it's like, you know what? I actually think you had some great legs. You just didn't race the smartest race you could have raced. So really good point to bring up DFRC. Not a ton of people know about it. It's like a W-prime balance for the critical power folks. So for listeners who may not know it, or to make it more simple, is it does a better way of describing what happened within a ride in terms of like an anaerobic effort. I like to make the analogy, it's like if anybody plays video games, it's like if you have a super secret power that can blow everything up or vaporize something, FRC is kind of like that. And the DFRC lets you know when you hit that button, what happened? How hard did you hit it? How long did you hold it for? And how long did it take you to regenerate? So that can help people too. And so maybe it's pacing for that person. They just depleted super quick and then they had to hold on. and not die, right? Whereas, but to go negative eight, I mean, that guy went balls deep goalie. Yep. And also, that's real hard. And it's funny because like, those are the days that improve the model too. Yeah, for sure. Absolutely. Because, I mean, the model's reading whatever it was before. So when you hit peak powers, again, if you hit your peak 90-minute power, better yet, you know, peak one-minute power, it's going to then read you better. And as an athlete, you're stair-stepping up your performance, and that should happen. And also sometimes, actually, one of the hardest things about modeling stuff like that is the recovery rate itself. yeah especially if you're super fresh or if you're fatigued you know the model could be like you could have a it could say that you've got a fully charged weapon to blow everything up and yet you pull that trigger and nothing's there and you're like forgot to load the cartridge forgot to load the cartridge screw yeah so you like forgot to eat or you like really weren't recovered that well or you need more endurance training or like whatever it is anyway so you know because I've got one of my clients She will have a really bad day the first day after a good rest. I mean really bad. It'll be like she'll go to do threshold intervals, like two times up her favorite climb or something. And she'll get up the first climb and her average power for it will be like 20 watts lower than she could do on good legs. The next day, she'll go smash it. and the day after that even better day after that even better now if there were any more you know stage races like five six seven days probably even better but at the same time you are really burning the candle at the other end so how have you coached that athlete any different if at all given that what we've done is you know now that we know this is a pattern in her legs that first day back We're just ready for it. It's just like, all right, go have the bad day. Come back. The power numbers aren't going to be great, but you know the next couple days are going to be great after this one. And it's hard, too, because we've tried structured openers, and they just don't work. It's got to be a super hard effort for her to really wake everything up. If it's moderate openers for an average athlete, it doesn't work. And so there's, you know, occasionally, this is like a rare case, too. I've only had like maybe two or three clients ever out of like over 100 people where this has been the case. But I'm fascinated by it. And I don't know why it happens. I wish I did. But we've learned how to manage it. And so going into big races, you know, we know she needs a couple hard days before she has a really good performance. And we just build that into the plan. Yeah, I'm glad you bring that up too because I've had a few athletes like that as well and I still, not to like take the easy way out, I think that there's some psychology there but it's also very like physically driven too and so what I'll do with a rider like that is again you try to stay ahead of it and plan right and with them I'll do like the day before like 10 or 15 minute like time trial. Like burn it pretty hot on the upper end of FTP, recover a bit, openers, ride, and then away we go. And what I call those people, those types, is, you know, riding better with high load in their legs. Like they just need to get beat up a little bit before they start going good. Yeah, and we found that a 10 or 15 minute effort, sometimes even a little longer, is actually pretty optimal. Yeah, and again, I don't know exactly why. I wonder if it has something to do with you got to either, you know, dump some glycogen to get repleted and everything's kind of back to normal. If there's like some pain mechanisms in the brain that need to be flipped on. I honestly have no idea. I wonder if it's hormonal, like the body's not producing enough catecholamines and needs a kick in the pants to start doing that or like the receptors. I don't know. I would love to do some blood tests or something like that or genetic tests or muscle biopsies and see what's going on. I will also say it doesn't happen with unfit people. It happens with fit people. If you're living in the 100 to 130 CTL life, those riders will typically need a little bit of load in their legs if they're not a sprinter to do that as well and so that's those are some like correlations I've seen yeah and you know I think kind of what we're getting to here in the larger picture is that you know the finer details of rest really do need to be individualized and that actually you know what there's one other thing that I just thought of that I I thought of this like a week ago. I was like, oh, we should talk about this. But I'm glad I remembered now before we stopped recording, which is occasionally, you know, I'll talk to somebody who says they need like a week or a week and a half of hard training before they feel like they have their legs back under them again. And I looked at the training of somebody who was saying this to me, and it turns out that this person was severely overtrained. and that once their legs started to feel good, they were already praying for the recovery week after the next week's training. Yeah, I was going to say that person's just not truthful with themselves. Yeah. Or, you know, or the coach isn't listening or, you know, because this person did have a coach who was like, oh, well, you're tired. Okay, cool. Well, here's more sprint efforts. Here's some one minute hill reps. Um, not, not the way to go. So I, yeah, I think, and this is something that I noticed as well is, um, you know, people who ride do endurance ride. Um, you know, some, some people actually need a proper warmup to feel good for an endurance ride and that's all right. But, um, some folks who need a warmup and then another like hour to open back up, you know, that might be another sign that you need some rest too. Yeah, no, that's, it's a, that's a really good point. and we could even talk about like a good warmup. How, how long does it actually need to be? That could be another, that would be a good episode. Um, you can be warmed up in 15 minutes straight up. You can be warmed up in eight minutes. I'll leave it at that. Um, but when, when you, when you take longer and longer to like warm up and, and come on board, If you're seeing that kind of like in your trend in your training or you're hearing that as a coach from your athletes, yeah, that's a little red flaggy in terms of how suppressed is this person. Yeah. So overall, on a scale of one to California king size bed, how critical is rest? Brazilian. Yeah, that's a number, right? Oh, I was going to say, I know Brazilians. It's beyond a billion. Only Jim Lehman is going to get that joke. So whatever number was associated with the California king says bed, sure times infinity. I don't know. Rest is everything. If you're not resting, like why the hell are you training? That's kind of my point. Like nothing will happen. All the training in the world won't go good unless you're sleeping. So first sleep, then. Start training. Sure, because if all you do is lay around, you won't get any, you'll have a good vertical leap, but you won't go toward your training. Then you can do your training and then find rhythm that makes sense. Stress plus rest equals adaptation. You take one of those aspects out of the equation, you won't get the other. It's like high VO2 max. It's like heart rate, stroke volume. You've got to have both aspects of the equation. And if you want the same output and you want to... Doc one of these things, you've got to have the other one has to be a lot higher. So that happens for sure. And have you ever had a client or a potential client who loves working hard and loves group rides and loves the unstructured hard fun stuff and then wants to get faster at something? but doesn't want to give that stuff up and you know that if you layer training on top of what they're already doing you're going to dig them right into a hole so yeah yes have had those clients currently have those clients and one approach I say is if you want something you've never had you got to do something you've never done right and oftentimes that means giving up maybe what you have now in order to get it better in the long run, right? And so what you do is you, what I do anyway, is I walk them through the logic of, all right, if all we do is this group ride, which gives you 120 TSS, and we do that every week, at some point you're going to plateau, right? In order to move beyond and walk them through what that could look like, and then also make them realize that VO2, for example, it can't last forever. Yeah. Like, I'm not going to give you... 52 weeks of VO2 training. However, you know, VO2 or threshold hill climbing or whatever we're working on will make you a better rider. And when you're a better rider, the group ride is more fun. The hard flexes on the friend is more fun. The wine tastes better. The food tastes better when you're more fit and you're that kind of thing, you know, this analogy. And so what I try to do, I mean, you try to sell them on the concept of, hey, in order to get better, we need to change. And we have to rest. We have to rest. Again, and I drill down in that too because it's like no training will work unless you rest. Anyway. I have definitely talked several clients out of working with me or potentially even just structured training in general because I tell them what it's going to entail. And I'm like, you know, I say we can definitely work these things in, but it's not going to be every week. You know, I'm going to tell you to skip your high intensity interval training kettlebell class more often than not. Because, you know, is it fun? Yeah. Does it feel like a good workout? Yeah. Is it a great social environment? Absolutely. Nothing like getting into a crowded room and breathing other people's air for an hour these days, right? That's true. But to that point though, and I call that firing clients, which I've done before. However, I want them to have fun. So whatever is fun, let's train them for that. Let's have that into the program. However, if they come to me and they say, all right, here's what I'm doing, make me better. And then I say, okay, here's what we're going to do. You will get better. And they say, well, here's what I'm doing. And it's not your plan. Well, then it's not going to work. And then so, wash my hands, done. You get where I'm going with that. Yeah, you have to compromise. That's right. We all want, or most coaches, I hope, would want whatever's happening with their client. You want the client to enjoy it. That's it. Yeah, that's it. and I think you know to this end though every you know our clients come to us for training right and then and that's what they're focused on that's what they read about that's what they hear on podcasts and and so I think when a coach tells you to rest more and find contrast and really starts to talk about how we can get better recovery in conjunction with training. That's generally a good conversation to have with a coach. That's a good indicator that someone cares about where you're going with that. So that's a good thing. It's very overlooked and I think that we need more conversations about what recovery can look like. And it's also... And I know we're getting long here, but like the recovery industry is also taking it to another level. I interviewed someone on the Train Right podcast, Christy Schwangen, and she wrote a book all about recovery. I'd check it out for anybody who wants. I read that book. It was great. Yeah. Yeah. Right. Because I mean, she's in read the book, but like straight up, all this fancy stuff don't work. So. What I liked about her book was she said we've made recovery a thing you do rather than like a process that the athlete or like part of the process that a human being does kind of thing. And what she's nodding at is like you need the recovery boots and the recovery shake and the... cold laser therapy and the heat sauna and then you become this recovery champion. She explored all of that very scientifically to investigate what worked and what didn't. And she comes to a conclusion at the end. So read her book. It's very good. At the end of the day, it's a very simple strategy and very simple approach. Starts with sleep. I do remember her wondering out loud in that conclusion, which was... She was basically saying the placebo effect is still in effect. And if you've got a really elaborate recovery routine and you don't do it, is the stress of not doing it going to keep you from recovering? Or something like that. And I thought it was a good point, honestly. Yeah, it's a really good point. And I think it's something to where you can't overlook the psychology. right of whether it was your client that's just not going good after the recovery block and you say and it happens time and time and time and time again so then you have you have to change in order to find a better strategy right so if somebody is hinged on this like I need my cold my cold ice water bath ice bath that's what's called um in order to like flex strong at the group ride Okay, cool, but like all the data in the world is suggesting that that's not what it is, man, or woman. And you can walk them through the logic, but if they're that hinged on it, it's also not hurting them necessarily. You could maybe make that argument. And so she calls them squeezy boots, like any pneumatic recovery boot out there. Space legs. Space legs, yeah, everybody's got their name for it. I even have a pair myself. I don't use them nearly as much anymore. In fact, I was one of the first users of the very first prototype from Normantech when they first came out. I had to write all this stuff about it. And the best thing about them is they make you lay down for 30 minutes and do nothing. They feel great. And I'm not going to say that they inhibit recovery by any means. I think they do a pretty good job of getting some inflammation out of some lower legs, but that doesn't necessarily mean you recover faster. So, yeah, it's a great book. And Christy's super cool. You should interview her. I will. Yeah. Let's set it up. I will do that. I will send that on the interwebs. Thank you so much. I will find my interwebs and check them. Alright man, do you have any thoughts or insights besides sleep well and eat well? Oh man, I have so many thoughts, Scully I know, you always do, you're always good for a thought, I love this Yeah, I'd say Start to, like for any listeners that are trying to find that extra edge on recovery, start to explore like taking a rest day on a weekend. It doesn't have to happen every weekend, but just start exploring that and see what not working and not training for a day does to your life. Huge. The other thing that I would say is start to think about how you regenerate. Like what it takes for you to truly unwind and relax. So putting the phone away, having more silence in your life, you know, hanging out, not watching TV and hanging out with your, you know, your spouse or your significant other, boyfriend, girlfriend, whatever, and like unplugging for a bit. As you recover, because you don't necessarily need your space legs on and recovery shaking hand to like recover. I think that the psychological aspect of like to truly recharge in an athlete's life. We're so stupid busy these days with all the things, including smashing watts. It's like start to become more of a human. And that's what I think I tell to my like pros is like, you just need to be a human. for today. You need real people stuff. I love that. So go for a walk. I tell people all the time, like, remember what it's like to be a person again. Yeah, exactly. Hang out with your cats. Hang out with your special someone. Call your mother. Yeah. Like wear jeans. Go apple picking. Don't wear apple. Apple picking was my favorite recovery activities in the fall, honestly. Dude, yeah. Pepin County. So I went to University of Wisconsin-La Crosse and Pepin County was like the, I don't know, epicenter of apples for the world. win apple picking every fall. It was very relaxing for what it's worth. All right, man. Thanks for coming on the podcast. Really appreciate it. Yeah, man. Thanks for having me. This is fun. All right, that's our show. Thanks again, Adam, for coming on to the podcast. Of course, you can check him out on Instagram, coach underscore AP, and he hosts the CTS Trainwreck podcast, so check that one out as well. So thanks, Adam, again, for having me on there. And of course, if you want to check me out on Instagram, at Empirical Cycling, and if you've got any coaching or consultation inquiries, you can reach out, empiricalcycling at gmail.com. Again, I've got a couple roster spots open, and we have a bunch of roster spots across all of our coaches, so please reach out. And of course, consultations, whatever your issue is. We will try to solve it. So if you want a second opinion, if you have a medical condition, Fabiano is actually a doctor and so he can help out with that kind of stuff. We have a time trial specialist, mountain bike specialist. We have all kinds of coaches with good expertise and we can help you out. So reach out empiricalcycling at gmail.com for a consultation. And of course, empiricalcycling.com slash donate for donating to the show. We really appreciate everybody doing that. So thanks again, everybody. We'll see you next time. 