Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Kolie Moore. Thank you, everybody, for listening. And of course, as always, please subscribe to the podcast, five-star iTunes rating, et cetera, et cetera. Share the podcast, especially if you like what we're talking about. It goes a long way towards helping us grow. And also, don't forget that we're ad-free. So if you want to donate, it keeps the lights on for us. You can do so at empiricalcycling.com slash donate. We have the show notes up on the website. And if you have any coaching or consultation inquiries, questions, and comments, you can... shoot me an email at empiricalcycling at gmail.com and of course as always becoming an empirical cycling coaching client does help the podcast as well so if you want to check me out on Instagram you can do so at empirical cycling we can amaze in the Instagram stories so give me a follow to check that out and today we have a really cool podcast so our guest is a research fellow at the University of Birmingham He's the nutritionist for Bora Hansgrohe, and he's also a really good Instagram to follow at Tim Podlogar, which is how to pronounce it. Although he says in English, people say Podlogar, and he thinks that's also acceptable. So he's got a really cool Instagram. He's a very open and thoughtful person. He's very thought-provoking as well. He does a lot of reading. and he does a lot of questioning things and so he and I had been chatting on Instagram now and then and I think he's a very interesting guy and I was so happy that he could come on to the podcast. So without further ado, let's get right into it. And you are Slovenian, correct? Yeah, yeah. Okay, so why are there so many good cyclists from Slovenia right now? Is it the water? Is it the mountains? Yeah, it's a good question. Slovenia is like... A very small country. We only have two million people living there. But the environment is like really, really nice for cycling. We have flats and we have proper mountains. So we are on the southern part of Alps. So we have like climbs up to 2000 meters of elevation. But I think what sets us apart to other countries is probably the lifestyle. Kids are educated in a way that allows them to play a lot outside. There is a lot of organized sport, so all the kids probably take part at least in one sport. So this gives kids an opportunity to develop into athletes probably. I don't see like Slovenian sports. or like professionals, I mean the coaches and the staff to be like top of the top in the world. It's just this like everybody's taking part in at least one sport and I think this is a difference. That's interesting. So is that how you got your start in cycling and exercise physiology? So my background, I have... When I was a kid and like probably up to like the second year of my university I was actually a sailor so I've been sailing for numerous years trying to like go to the Olympics become like a star in sailing but then at one point I saw that probably I can't really succeed in sailing and also like there is no money I can't live from sailing so I was on the point let's find a sport that would allow me to kind of become a professional in terms of like sports sciences and one of the things I wanted to kind of explore better was to better understand science and cycling was a perfect sport to do that because reading studies you can only understand so much unless you do like the sport yourself. and that's how I started cycling myself and now it's been probably around 10 years. Yeah, it's actually been about 10 years for me too. I was commuting to school when I went to get my second undergrad degree in biology and I was riding my bike to school and I thought this is the most fun thing I've ever done. I had been riding a little bit but I just started trying to go fast and I was like this is great. And then I heard that you could compete. So your Instagram is great, by the way. Everybody should follow you on Instagram, Tim Putlagar on Instagram. Thanks. And I remember a couple weeks ago, you posted a story. All the interesting stuff happens in your stories. I feel like my Instagram is raised the same way. I don't think you're interested in my Instagram, but I'm very much interested in yours. So in your Instagram, You talked about a story about how you got interested in exercise physiology. And I want you to tell that story to me because I love it so much. So, yeah, like I always thought I would study like engineering or physics or something like really like, yes, something more natural sciences or how to say. But then I had this strength and conditioning coach that wasn't really happy of how, like, sports sciences were in Slovenia, the university degree and stuff, and he was always opposing them. But the problem of his was that he wasn't, like, properly educated in the field, so he couldn't, like, do it himself. So one day he came up with an idea, okay, Tim, Perhaps you should be studying sports sciences so that two together can show them that perhaps they are incorrect. So I started studying sports sciences knowingly that I will hear things that are probably incorrect and I should probably like question them. And this was a really great start because whatever I heard at the uni I didn't take for granted but I just wanted to explore a bit deeper especially the things that I was really interested in so I started with being interested in like normal strength and conditioning like training for hypertrophy and stuff like that only then I started being interested in nutrition and then general exercise physiology and I always found some gaps in what lectures were telling us And this kind of stayed with me because, yeah, we all have certain ideas that perhaps are not true and are based on certain understanding and certain knowledge we acquire over the time. And I think we all have to come to our own conclusions based on the literature and based on the evidence we read and see. And that's, yeah, basically how I... My podcast co-host is actually a physicist himself and he always sympathizes with me when I talk about how difficult it is to interpret human physiology. Just the tools that we have and the definitions that we've been working with for so long are under Well, it's sort of like threshold. How many definitions of threshold do we have and how many are actually useful? I mean, I would say they're all useful in some degree, you know what I mean? Yeah, exactly. It's a great example because we all talk about those thresholds and then at one point we ask ourselves, are we actually talking about the same threshold? All right, well, I've got more questions on that in a little bit, but first I want to ask you about your current job. So you are the nutritionist for Bora Hansgrohe? Is it still Bora Hansgrohe? Yeah, yeah. How did you get that job? Did they come knocking at your door? Did they email you and say, we want to hire you? Or did you apply for the job properly? No, I just heard from them one day. Really? That's awesome. So why do you think that they asked you? Do you think that they really just want to eat a lot of Haribo? It was probably some recommendations from people that I know. I think, yeah, that's probably the way. And I got pretty known for my Instagram account and critical thinking. And I think that's probably how I got there. Because I never really... Like I wanted to work once in a sports team, but probably not yet because my priority kind of I try to remain in academia and I think that's the main job at the moment still Okay, so I have two questions about that, actually. The first one is, what are you researching in academia? Because you post a lot of stuff from your lab, but I don't really get a good impression of what you're actually studying. So what's your current project? I'm sure you have several. It's interesting because I'm working on different projects at the same time. So my main employment is actually... at the University of Birmingham. I'm a research fellow and I'm supposed to be working on a project looking at exogenous carbohydrate oxidation rates and how these are affected by heat acclimation. So this is a project I'm about to start pretty soon. But otherwise, there are still some things that I started when I was still in Slovenia. and these were more general like exercise metabolism studies or carbohydrate metabolism ones basically my main research interest has always been exercise metabolism slash like probably carbohydrate metabolism but I always kind of go into different ways as well like Study about Menton last year, core body temperature sensor and stuff like that. So I'm always kind of open to other things as well. Yeah. And well, because I get the sense that you that you both read widely and any time that you get struck by inspiration, you get on the bike and you start testing yourself. Yeah, pretty much. I mean, I've done the same thing. I had some inspiration a week or two ago, and my main focus in training is track sprinting, but I decided to jump on the bike, and because I'm so highly trained as a strength athlete, I thought I would try to find my maximal lactate steady state. I found some very interesting things, including that... If you don't do it for a while, it really hurts, like a lot. Okay, so in your role as a nutritionist for Borhansgro, what changes have you already implemented with the team? I assume it's a lot more carbohydrates. I mean, we have always been a carbohydrate first team, so it wasn't a lot like... Carbohydrate periodization and such and I kind of like that. One of the things probably I started really to push is more fructose in the recovery before racing and on the bike as well because fructose is probably my thing from also coming from research. Well, tell me more about that because I think because I just saw a thread on a forum a couple days ago talking about Fructose causes cancer, fructose doesn't get used by the muscles, all kinds of things. So tell me more about fructose and why it's beneficial and why you like to use fructose more for recovery and before races and stuff like that. So probably the biggest like in the public like why we kind of see fructose as a bad guy is the fact that all those sweet beverages like Coca-Cola and yeah any sweets are basically full of fructose and people like over consuming sugars such and also fructose and fructose can't really be metabolized in other tissues but in the liver so basically this kind of causes fructose overload in the liver especially if the liver glycogen is full and then we perhaps this leads to problems like accumulation or formation of fats in the liver which can be formed from fructose but in athletes this is just another energy source because for instance during exercise fructose uses a different transporter for the uptake from the gut into the bloodstream and this way we can actually get more carbohydrates into the bloodstream at a quicker rate. And then the next thing is because it has to go into the liver, in the liver it gets converted to glucose or lactate. or is forming glycogen. So during exercise, we get another substrate that muscles can use and this is lactate. So sometimes during exercise, if you're eating something with a lot of fructose, like just a tablespoon of sugar, you can actually see a higher lactate values. And this is just driving this concentration gradient up and we can then metabolize this lack of just like glucose. So the team was doing less fructose previously, like were most of their pre-race supplements and recovery supplements mostly glucose based? So it's kind of the problem is with I think in the industry itself because Most of the sports nutrition companies are still refusing to add fructose into their products and they just use maltodextrin but we've shown like in Birmingham and there are some other studies as well showing that even in recovery or pre-exercise perhaps additional fructose can speed up the liver glycogen synthesis so it's always like something that's beneficial but if we take a look at like composition of energy gels, energy drinks available on the market we see that they're mostly multi-texturing based and this is not ideal because this only allows you to ingest like up to 60-70 grams of carbs per hour whereas Professional cycling teams are pushing towards 120 at the moment and you can't really do that without addition of fructose. So it's something that like some brands are like finally catching up with silence, although we know this for like more than 15 years. And this is also like why I got involved in the sports nutrition brand and I started developing my product just for the sake because I couldn't give any good recommendations to my assets. So what is your product? What are you selling? So I'm not selling. I'm just basically, yes, yeah. I got approached by some people in Slovenia, a small brand, because I was pretty tough with them saying that their products are bad. And they said, yeah, can you help us do better? And I said, OK, well, let's do it. So the brand is called Endurance, starting with N and ending with Z. And basically, all the products are based on 1 to 0.8 ratio, maltodextrin and fructose, which I believe is the optimal ratio for during exercise fueling and then recovery as well, probably. Oh, interesting. Okay, because that... I will cross out that question later because that was one of the ones I was going to ask you. So let me actually ask you more about your job with where Hans grow. So because I know you and I had damned on Instagram before and you said that you're not a coach, but do you feel like you're starting to become more of like a nutrition coach in your role here? So I always kind of I don't want to be a coach, although I probably have a lot of like knowledge coaching wise. I even like lectured and gave lectures on about coach endurance coaching back in Slovenia. So this is something I'm kind of probably mostly pretty familiar with. I just don't want to coach anyone because I want to like be. As good as I can be in just one area. So this is nutrition. But in order to really understand nutrition and be good at giving advice, you then need to understand everything else around it. Otherwise you end up with just like a very reductionist view and you just focus on nutrition and you don't see anything else. and then you can come up with some stupid ideas. It might sound smart in terms of nutrition but they just don't work. Well, I like that because I think what I've found in coaching because I came from academia initially but I was riding my bike at the same time and I was always trying to apply what I was learning to my training and I found that When you actually have to apply it practically, you come up with very different requirements for the things that you are going to work with. Because I cannot measure my VO2 max just riding around. And so the big question became, what are the key performance metrics that we can use for practical everyday athletes versus What metrics would you use having daily access to a lab? Are they different? Yeah, I think so. So one of the things that I learned over the years was, so I can measure, I have access to all the equipment. I can do a vitimax test every single day. I can measure rectal temperature every single day. I can do probably continuous biopsies. I can look at the blood and stuff. At one point you have to ask yourself, what are you going to do with this data? How is this data going to help you improve, develop? And at one point you come up to the conclusion that sometimes more data is not as good because you just get lost in all of those details and also you spend way too much time testing, analyzing the data and then you kind of forget about the basics. So I'm not like very convinced that you need to go into the lab and do all the tests all the time. It's nice to have like a picture of the athletes, an idea of what's going on, but like continuous testing day after day with like measuring VO2 on every single training session, measuring lactate on every single training session, that's just overkill in my view. It doesn't help. So how often would you test somebody in the lab? So it really depends on what kind of an athlete he is. So let's take someone that is kind of trying to become a cyclist. He's still improving greatly. So for instance, he can still improve the VO2max every single year. Then perhaps like having two to three times, two to three testing sessions in the lab can be a good thing. For instance, to measure the first lactate threshold, the second threshold, and then perhaps like VO2max. But then if you take like professional athlete, his VO2max is not going to change over the years at all. It's going to stay where it is. So why test it if it's not going to change? So it's like, it's pointless. So you probably just have to test. the parameters that are actually changing. So perhaps like the first threshold, the second threshold, and then you can always like do it on the go as well. Sometimes if it's like taking too much time because you can clearly see based on like heart rate, based on the feelings, how the rider is behaving. And those thresholds are not set in stone. So you see one number, I don't know, 350 watts today. the next day it can be like 355 and you just like fatigue think or daily variability so you come to the point where those differences are so small that you can't pick them up anymore whereas in novice athletes you have to keep testing because those change so quickly. Yeah I completely agree with you on all of that by the way. but so you mentioned first and second threshold because this is something where I think that you and I disagree a little bit on which I thought would be interesting to talk about because you know I asked you once what you prefer for a second threshold well actually let's talk about first threshold first so what's your testing procedure for first threshold like what's your how do you define because if we want to talk about it in terms of exercise intensity domains it's between the Oh, crap, I never talk about the domains. It's the light and the moderate or something? Yeah, so it's moderate, heavy, and... Yeah, between moderate and heavy. So how would you go about finding that? So, like, myself, if I can do it and I have the equipment at the time, I would probably do lactate, like 0.5 of a millimeter increase from the baseline. That's how I would define the first threshold. In the past, or more recently, let's say, I've been using the ventilatory threshold, so the first increase in ventilation. And it was pretty similar to, for instance, lactase. I was going to say, because don't VT1 and LT1 decouple to some degree? I mean, it's probably down again to like... To the measurement error as well. Yeah, okay. Because what I found with LT1 testing is that, you know, from baseline, pretty much as soon as it starts going up, that's about where I find LT1 happens. So like, for instance, last test I did on myself, I was at about one point, like... 1 or 1.2 millimole up into a certain thing. And then I noticed my RPE change over about 30 watts, but my blood lactate only went up about 0.3 millimole. And so when we look at a threshold like that, what other kind of criteria would you use to help define it? So it's probably talk test. is very useful as well. So this is the last point where you can normally talk because the ventilation is still manageable. And the other one is probably like hard trade drift that would occur over the duration of a few hours. So for instance, I know exactly my threshold just by like doing training sessions in close proximity to the threshold. And if I see like An increase in heart rate over like two, three, four hours, then I'm definitely over the threshold. If there is no change in heart rate, then I am at or below the threshold. That's how I see it most of the time. Would you expect that to change with somebody who's sprint trained like myself? Good question. I know. Yeah, I mean... Probably the duration when you would start to expect the drift, because even in my case, you will see a drift eventually. But in your case, perhaps you will see a drift at a lower amount of time or work performed. Yeah, I mean, that is exactly what I see. Like my heart rate actually starts to drift pretty immediately, like within about 20 or 30 minutes. But I actually don't find that myself. I don't find heart rate and drift to be a good indicator because... For me personally, I want my threshold definitions to work for everybody across the board, whether sprint trained or not. Because I know that you work with super well-trained endurance athletes most of the time, but when I'm working with an average athlete who may have a lot of fast twitch fibers or do a lot of strength training on the side, I want my definition to work like that too. You know what I mean? Yeah, yeah, yeah. I totally, yes. Yeah, well, okay, so let's talk about the second threshold, because you don't like FTP is what I hear. I mean, I'm not like a lover or a hater of a certain threshold. I just, you know, like knowing the limitations of each one, I think that's appreciating the limitations and positives is I think the most important thing. So if you're talking about professional athletes and athletes at the highest rank, I think like critical power in my view is the way to go. But I've done myself functional threshold power tests, 60 minutes once, and I found them pretty good. I've done lactate threshold tests and I found them pretty good. So all those tests I think have a space, even the ramp test. to a certain degree, like what TrainerRoad was doing, is fine for a certain population because you can't expect everyone to do like three minute all out and 12 minute all out and five minute all out and expect to get like a perfect fit for the critical power test and you can't expect people to go to the lab and do the lactate threshold testing. So overall I think it's down to the context of what athlete wants to achieve and then it's also down to the coach. that knows the limitations of the threshold he's using and I think like consistency is the key here because yeah if you do like in the spring a functional threshold power test like 20 minutes and then you take 95% and then in three months time you do a critical power test and you compare the data that's not how you do it you have to be consistent and I think that's the most important thing. I agree with you there because I personally don't like critical power because I find especially with sprinters and people who have good anaerobic capacity, it can still overestimate what is reasonable for them to accomplish as a threshold. So I want to run my definition of threshold by you and see what you think. So my definition of threshold is the work rate at which above the athlete fatigues much faster and below. where they fatigue much slower. Yeah, in a way, I mean, it's very difficult, different how you view it. But yeah, I get this point about like, the percentage of muscle fiber, the muscle fiber type distribution, because I think that's plays a big role in time to like fatigue or time to task failure, when you go above the threshold. And obviously, the critical, the problem of critical power is One can sustain the intensity of critical power for like 15 minutes perhaps and the other one would sustain it for 40 minutes so how do you compare so this is kind of an issue people have and you have to be really like understand this so that you kind of Take note of this and the FTP is very simple. It's defined by time. It's just not defined by physiology, let's say. Interesting, because I'm going to have Andy Coggan on the podcast to talk about this very thing, actually, because he initially, a long time ago, said FTP is the power at maximal lactate steady state. But there was a good paper recently from, I think, I think Mark Burnley was on it. Andrew Jones was an author. I think Poole was an author. And where they talk about the downsides of using maximal lactate steady state and, you know, that they put forward that critical power would be a better metric. And while I agree with their criticisms of maximal lactate steady state, you know, I actually forgot where I was going with this. Yeah, so I see the drawback, but I think You know, what I use personally is I look for the inflection point in the power curve. Because that to me is the best marker that we have for this threshold because I don't think it correlates very well with the definition for maximal lactate steady state, for critical power, for OBLA, for DMAX method and a RAM test, like all of these things. I don't think that they work with 100% of athletes. That's my personal standard as a coach for threshold. Do you agree with that? Do you disagree? I'm sure you're somewhere in the middle. Yeah, I try to understand both camps. And I think it's like looking from the scientific point of view, we are trying to find like an explanation, a physiological explanation of what would constitute a threshold. And this is why we say, okay, so maximum elected steady state, the problem of it is that We are looking at what happens in the blood and then critical power probably more reflect what is going on in the muscle. But then from the coaches perspective, this doesn't really help. So when you want to like really prescribe training sessions, then perhaps the duration component is more important. And this is when You have a good point to use a different method. If you know the limitations of your method, I think that's the most important thing. Personally, I don't find my method actually has a limitation because I find that it works for every single athlete that I coach. I didn't want to say limitation per se, but it's the physiological thing that perhaps the rationale. Or the explanation for underlying physiology. Yeah, you're right. Because what happens in the blood is not what happens in the muscle. And, you know, what happens in the working set of muscles is not necessarily the same across all muscles. So if we're looking, I agree. So if we're looking for a metabolic state in a muscle, we're not going to find it distributed evenly across all working muscle. So, or the blood. Yeah. Yeah, I agree. So speaking of metrics. I just saw this morning that you got a paper on VO2max accepted. So congratulations, by the way. So tell me a little bit about that paper. So yeah, it started like a year and a half ago when I started shaping the module. I was in Slovenia. So it was like endurance coaching methods or something like that. and I was reading those papers from the Norwegian school Norwegian scientists and I found out that their view to Max was in the like 70s like people were highly trained elite athletes probably average 72 75 and that's super high but then when I was looking at the threshold power like or the like the I think they use power at four millimoles of lactate. It was like 4.4, 4.5 watts per kilo. And I was like, well, these are not elite athletes because elite athletes or elite cyclists with a VO2 max of 75 have a threshold of like 5.3 at least watts per kilo, most of them. And the Increases in performance you see after result of certain intervention are as a result much different and those athletes obviously their V2Max was really high and the power was slow their efficiency on the bike was really poor and they have a lot of room for improvement so whatever you will give them they will improve vastly and obviously this didn't reflect like the real world. So if you would apply the same strategy into Bora-Hans-Glory riders or whichever like highly trained athletes, you will not see the same responses. And I was thinking perhaps V2Max is not the best, let's say predictor of performance or let's say or better like descriptor of training status of athletes. So I started thinking Well, what would it be then? And then I came up with this idea like, okay, well, it's probably the boundary between the heavy and severe exercise intensity domain. So let it be maximum elected, steady state, critical power. At the end of the day, they are all very close, like within like probably 10, 15 watts. And that's still like 0.1, 0.2 watts per kilo, right? It's not that vastly different. So I came with this idea and talked to the colleagues Peter Leo and James Frank and they were like, yeah, you're right. So we started like shaping an opinion article and basically we were just hit by reviewers saying that that's just not acceptable. So we were rejected in four different journals. I'm sorry about that. Well, why do you think that there was such pushback? Because, you know, I think People like me and our generation of, well, if I may be so bold as to suggest that I am a sports scientist of any degree. So I think our generation of sports scientists would generally think that that's probably acceptable. So why do you think you were met with such bad reviews? I don't know. I think it's, as you said, it's probably like the generation thing because even looking at the Twitter this morning when we shared that we got this accepted and we explained what the paper is about or that they haven't been able to read it. It was kind of the younger generation was like, yeah, that's how it should be done. There is no like no question whatsoever. But then the older generation was more like. Yeah, perhaps no. It's a really good descriptor of general health status. And yeah, they are there. So it was like, I think it's a tradition thing at the end of the day. And I think this is the biggest, one of the big problems we have in like sports sciences or exercise physiology as such, because we have these old traditions that we just keep copying and pasting into new articles. And then We are sometimes just lost in old dogmas and beliefs. Yeah. Well, because I think every couple of years, what seems to happen is a different section of the exercise physiology world finds out that certain things related to VO2 max and performance are not as they seem. Because I remember a couple of years ago, In another section of Exercise Physiology Twitter that I follow, they discovered that, you know, critical power, I think that what they were measuring or maximal lactate steady state happens at a different percentage of VO2 max for the population, and that maybe assigning interval training or endurance riding at a percentage of VO2 max is suboptimal. And this reminds me of that. a little bit, you know what I mean? Yeah, exactly. So, for instance, what we do, like, usually in exercise metabolism studies is we get participants in the lab, we do a view to max test, which is like a graded exercise test to task failure, and then instead of figuring out where the first and the second threshold are. But whichever definition, what we do is we just take percentage of the peak power we achieve on that test. And for some people, it can be over the threshold, the first one, or for some, it can be below. And nobody knows, but we are happy because we standardized the intensity. What I'm getting a sense of, and I actually see this a lot in the cycling world, whether it's at races or whether it's in the lab or with coaches, having something standardized and easy for the people who are administering whatever it is, is more typical than something that is actually the most accurate or the best for the athlete. One of the problems is probably like understanding because many coaches don't have like a proper training. They just become trainers or coaches after completing or finishing their cycling career and they just learned a few things that they don't really know the physiology and they're just doing what they were taught in the past or they just listen to someone who has certain beliefs and then we end up with Exactly this. Yeah, I always call it selection bias. So whatever you think works for you must work for everybody. And if it doesn't work for a certain person, they don't, you know, well, not always, but it seems like oftentimes they won't think about what is wrong with my approach. They'll think, oh, this person just isn't getting faster and that's just what it is. Yeah. So this is like probably comes. back to like responders or non-responders to exercise training because in the past there were some studies indicating yeah you can't certain people cannot improve VO2max and we're talking about untrained people and what they did in those studies were they just give them like steady state exercise and then a few years ago there was a scientist Karsten Lundby that actually challenged this and what he did was he just assigned those people that did not respond initially to a training protocol that was a bit more demanding and suddenly they increased their view to make. So basically there are no non-responders. It's just that the training is not tailored. I wrote a TrainingPeaks article using that very paper. a couple years ago. I used that one and there was another one by I think a great set of a Ronstad where they had the same amount of training. sessions per three or four weeks. And for one group, they did most of the training sessions in the first week and then one for the next two or three weeks. And the other group, they did them spaced evenly. And the people who did the biggest training block initially actually improved more. So between those two, the premise of my article was to suggest... If you're not finding that somebody's improving, try adding more training, which is funny because normally in coaching I say if somebody's not improving, you might want to add more rest, but you can go the other way with it too. Yeah, it's really like, it's a tough one. And sometimes, yeah, it's like listening to the effort and figuring out what really is and in what state they are, whether it's fatigue or is it just, yeah, lack of training. Yeah, and Linby is actually one of my very favorite people right now in terms of doing research and publishing papers. So I love that you brought him up because he's one of my favorites. Him and Montero are my two very favorites right now. Okay, so let's talk about nutrition and adaptation a little bit because I'm really excited to talk about this with you because it's very rare that I find somebody who agrees with me on stuff like this. So my podcast listeners will be like, oh God, this again. But I think I've only released one podcast episode on this. Okay, so the big question is, can we improve adaptations with endurance training by manipulating nutrition? Yes and no. Of course. So it depends. So what is the yes? How does the yes work? So when we manipulate nutrition, what do we manipulate and how does that improve adaptation? So let's... come to those responders and non-responders. For instance, we have an athlete that only has 10 hours a week to train, right? And he's young, he's recovering quick, but he simply, he's working full time and doesn't have more time to devote training. So in this case, carbohydrate periodization or restricting carbohydrates before certain training sessions can help because this will add to the, like, Stress of the training session itself and as a result of that he might improve and this is pretty clear in the evidence like carbohydrate periodization works in those people but then when we have an athlete that has all the time in the world like can train 20-30 hours a week training is way bigger stimulus than its nutrition so we actually with nutrition needs to make sure that he can do as much training as possible. So in this way, with nutrition, we just support the training rather than make adaptations or like try to improve the adaptations to training. I 100% agree with you on all of that. And actually, one of the things that I've found that is so difficult with carbohydrate periodization for amateur athletes is actually getting them to eat an isocaloric diet. A lot of the time they are failing at having enough food because the other foods that they eat are so filling. Do you find the same? It depends really on athlete, from athlete to athlete. But it's like one of the things that I really struggle is to like probably to get them eat more carbohydrates and probably less fat. I think like carbohydrate availability is... Peek limitation to most athletes because they're kind of fears of having to match too much, too many carbohydrates. So what kind of training session do you have people do with restricted carbohydrates? So for instance, I don't like currently work with many athletes because I simply don't have time. But like for myself, I have exactly 15 hours a week. of time available for cycling. I can't do like an hour more probably. And because I've been doing this for years, I need to find a way how to make the training sessions a bit more stressful. So whenever I have training sessions that are like steady state or below the first threshold, I try to do them like with limited amount of carbs, which means that I wake up, have coffee and jump straight to the bike and do the session. If next day I have a hard training session planned, I might have some carbohydrates in the second hour of the training session. If I have like another steady state training session the next day, I would just go without carbs. And then in the previous evening, I would probably wouldn't like overfill myself with carbohydrates. On the other hand, If I was doing intervals, I would obviously have breakfast, eat plenty of carbs the evening before and during as well. So what would you say is about the maximum duration for a steady state training session where you would restrict carbohydrates? I find it's around two hours probably. That's pretty much what I find too. And actually I've experimented with some people going longer. than that with restricted carbohydrates. But I would usually tell them to, you know, eat a low carbohydrate meal before getting on the bike and then eat carbohydrates on the bike because you're already depleted and you don't want to bonk. And that's what I've actually found works pretty well. Yeah. I mean, one of the things that like the problem of those long training session fasted without carbohydrates is that you basically are depleting the liver glycogen and the liver glycogen is a good like signal to the body of the hunger so if you finish this session without any carbs you will really have depleted liver glycogen and for the rest of the day you might be overfeeding as a result of that because you would be starving especially considering that muscle is kind of being prioritized, at least that's how I see it in terms of glycogen repletion. So liver can stay, like, fill to a limited capacity for like at least 24 hours after being completely empty. Interesting. Okay, cool. So actually that brings up another question. So facet rides. You know, this is similar because I don't have people do carbohydrate restricted rides fasted. I actually dislike fasted rides like completely. Although, you know, I think it's for short and easy. I think it works. So it's, you know, so you would say about an hour or two fasted is OK. Yeah. So one of my PhD studies was actually looking at delayed carbohydrate feeding. And I think this is like. really, really good way of how to maintain very high fat oxidation rates, maintain the cellular stress, but maintain blood glucose levels and maintain glycemia. I think this is really important from the recovery perspective. So I usually, to my athletes, recommend having carbohydrates in the second hour of exercise. I'm a bit more extreme just because it's me and I can do whatever I want. I respect that, because I think you always have to try something yourself and see how stupid is this that I'm about to do before I give it to somebody that I'm responsible for. Actually, that brings up what I wanted to ask you next about this, which is, so what do you think is the mechanism behind this? Because I think a couple papers have looked at this, but I'm not entirely sure what you think about this. It's probably like a combination of many different things. And we scientists like to see things from the reductionist, reductionism's perspective, which means that we just look at what we're interested in. So a really good example would be like, we know that perhaps adaptations are linked to high free fatty acid availability or like appearance in the bloodstream or concentrations in the bloodstream. But then, so we kind of want to like have high amounts of free fatty acids in the blood during exercise and this is going to lead to adaptations. So that's why we do glycogen depleted training and that's why we do no feeding during exercise. But then if you take a look from another perspective, we know that lactate can also be a stimulus for adaptations or like the pathway that activates certain, so the metabolite that activates certain pathways. So, and we know that lactate actually suppresses lipolysis, so free fatty acid concentration in the bloodstream. So it's not something that kind of is one rule or one stimulus. I think it's like continuous, like stressful situations. It's like training. You can't do the same training session day after day thinking you will get better and better at the same rate. You need like a kind of experiment. But overall, I think it's the flux through the mitochondria that's most important. Whatever this is, is it fats? Is it carbohydrates? It doesn't really matter. It's lung acids. Mitochondrial working at full capacity. I think it's interesting you say that because I have an even more reductionist view of adaptation than that. But to me, if we look at mitochondrial flux... I think that goes hand in hand with all of the other stimulus that I think happens, such as presence of reactive oxygen species, you know, AMPK activation, you know, presence of calcium, things like that. And so as long as we've got the mitochondria working at a high rate for a long time, we get all of these other things that I see. Exactly. Yeah. So, so, you know, it's I actually call that I've always wanted to know who said this first, but I don't remember. It was. is metaphorically true, but literally false. So it gets us to act in such a way that leads to improvement, but not exactly for the right reasons, even though the right reasons are happening parallel to what we think is happening. Yeah, yeah, it's a good point. I mean, also like one of the things that we kind of nutritionists like to do is, okay, well, so we'll do fasted rights or carbohydrate depleted rights so that we will induce higher fat oxidation rates during exercise. So let's work on fat oxidation rates during exercise and improve that. And I'm like, well, are you sure about this, that you want to increase fat oxidation rates on its own without improving like the first threshold and the second threshold? And just for the sake of increasing fat oxidation rates, because if you like, if you compare Pogacar and Any other athlete that's, yeah, probably any other athlete, you will see that Pogacir has much higher fat oxidation rates, but not because he's like fat adapted, it's because simply his mitochondria are capable of oxidizing more of the substrate. And you naturally gain this ability to oxidize fat. So training for fat adaptation, I think most of the time is Inferior approach to training because you actually want to be improving the effort as a whole rather than just fat oxidation rate. Oh, I agree with you because, you know, Pogacar's coach, San Milan, has said that... Pogacar is special because he has such low lactate at high power output, but I see that as parallel to fat oxidations because the big question for me is, is he actually burning the glycogen first or is he actually not burning glycogen? That's why his blood lactate is low because fat oxidation and lactate oxidation have pretty much the same determinant in the muscle, which is mitochondrial surface area and importers, right? Yeah, yeah, I agree. So I started thinking about this some time ago when I got to the lab, a person that was positioned very well on the race across America. So he has been competing there year after year. Unfortunately, he didn't want overall, but he was always pretty close. And I asked him. How do you feel your training sessions? And he was like, well, I always have carbohydrates, I always have breakfast and on the bike I eat 60 to 70, 80 grams per hour. And I was like, okay, well, let's see how your fat oxidation rates are. And he was on the bike and his fat oxidation rates were incredibly high on its own without like any special nutritional training or whatever. So his fat oxidation rates were like one grams per per minute, which is super high, right? For a high carbohydrate diet. But his second threshold was probably relatively low. And my imagination, my feeling is that his proportion of type 1 fibers is just so high that simply he can't be using most of the time fatty acids. Yeah. Well, so that brings me to my next question, which is why do people confuse Substrate Utilization with Adaptation. Maybe you don't know why, but let's talk about this a little bit. Let's discuss it. Yeah, I don't know. It's all started probably like with Tim Noakes and his idea about increasing fat oxidation rates. The thing that people want because we only have such an amount of carbohydrates, let's say the carbohydrates, but then increase fat oxidation rates and a certain degree this kind of makes sense because yeah, obviously we don't have enough carbohydrates in the body. So instead of like thinking about how to reduce the relative effort. at least like 200 watts. So that's from being above the first threshold to be below the first threshold. And this way increasing fat oxidation rates. We started thinking about how do we at the same relative exercise intensity increase fat oxidation rates. And then, okay, well, we can do that with high fat diet, obviously, because we remove the carbohydrates, but then we didn't do much in terms of. General Training probably. And then it started then like it developed into like this carbohydrate prioritization, which on the paper sounds very smart. So let's restrict carbohydrates before certain training sessions. And we teach this way the body to be metabolically flexible, so that it's going to be using more fats at lower intensities. but still maintain the ability to utilize carbs at high intensities. But I'm not too sure if this is actually the mechanism why people improved after such intervention or was it just because they got better and because of the bigger training stimulus. And we are back to the question we had earlier on. Yeah, we are. But man, let's take a minute to think about what happened to Tim Noakes because he was so good. Way back in the day. What was that? When was the change? About 10, 12 years ago? Something like that? No, if you even look at his papers from the 90s, he was always challenging beliefs, but for some time he was challenging beliefs in the areas that needed challenging. So he made like improvements and he made people think but now he just It's like it's like he started thinking outside the box but as soon as his outside the as soon as the box Started to encompass his outside the box. He had to go outside that box, too Yeah, it's funny because he's done so much great work in like exercise physiology field and I really love his studies. And he's still, in my mind, one of the giants of exercise physiology. But in the recent years, he's just, yeah, that's been just crazy. Yeah, I agree. Okay, so let's go with the other thing. So why can, why does, Nutritional interventions, how do they not help adaptation? So let's think more about like professional athletes. So because I think a lot of people see some professional athletes doing low carbohydrate rides, but in your opinion, it's completely unnecessary, right? Yeah. One of the things is then if you do a low carbohydrate ride, then you probably have to sacrifice the duration or intensity of that ride or the recovery so if you want to do like 25 hours a week then you probably really can't do that much especially at the younger age perhaps like if we take for example Chris Froome or those All the riders that are just used to doing such large volumes and have been doing that for ages now, perhaps they need a nutritional intervention to increase that stress. But for younger riders that are still improving, we just need to support with the nutrition. It's the same like as if heat training, I mean like heat adaptation or altitude training, it can be A stimulus, but too much can be always a problem. So let's think about a developing athlete, for instance. So at what point would you say, because a lot of developing athletes are teenagers, they're in university, they don't have a lot of time to ride. So at what age, at what point in training would you think, okay, it may be time to start doing some morning fasted rides? It really depends like how they recover, how much they are improving. For instance, if they have like some coaches like to do seven day long block, so no recovery, no proper recovery day. So no like rest day, but they have like one hour really easy spin. So for instance, we can start with that and see how they are. For that like easy spin you don't you just have protein beforehand and perhaps even like some essential amino acids during the ride and see how you feel and how you recover. But other than that I probably like I don't recommend unless they're like time limited really to add any way of carbohydrate periodization because you're always risking because getting them into like relative energy deficiency and we don't really want that. Yeah, because I agree because one of the things that I think I've seen a lot with some local amateur athletes, some elite ones who are well regarded, they'll do things like, I'm going to do an eight-hour fasted Fat Max ride today. It's like, and everybody's losing their minds because, you know, think about the people who look up to you. Like, this is crazy for you to do, but What if some 14-year-old kid wants to do the same? And then this leads to big problems down the road, you know what I mean? So actually, here's a question that's completely out of the blue, but when you post stuff like that that you're doing on social media, because I remember one day you did a fasted ride, because I think it was something like you didn't believe in carbohydrate loading. It's better to do a fasted hard ride and then... Eat A Lot or something like that. So, you know, do you think that there's some kind of mechanism of responsibility to make sure that, you know, kids watching and who want to get faster and who respect you, like, don't do the same thing? Yeah, probably. So I got this quite a lot from my coach because he was, yeah, because I was posting these stupid comments and what I was doing. And he was like, come on, team, you have to, like. remove those comments because obviously this is not doing anyone a favor and probably I don't really show what all the suffering I'm going through. Yeah, nobody does. Just because, yeah, because it's just, yeah, it's not appropriate and that's why I kind of really want to like on Instagram trying to push the carbohydrates to be as important as possible because, yeah, in the past I think I was also Part of like the people that were giving out the wrong message. And I think that's not good, especially after seeing that sometimes in this search and training session, then I got asked by certain people, why did you do those intervals at this and this intensity, this amount of rest? And I was like, well, I have absolutely no idea, but apparently somebody is analyzing my training sessions. I mean, you have like what, 2,500 Instagram followers or something like that. So Yeah, it's not much, but... Yeah, I mean, I've only got 1900, so I like to think I don't have much either. And then, you know, somebody will tag me like, hey, why did you say this? What about this? And I'm like, oh, people are paying attention. That's weird. Yeah, I think I like sometimes I just for the sake of this, I post a stupid story. I remember last summer I was... Going to Italy and then on the way there I stopped in a chocolate shop and I wrote down that I'm doing fat loading. And then I got loads of questions about fat loading. I actually did fat loading before a doctor's appointment a couple weeks ago. We got some bacon. from a local friend who's got a farm, and we ate it, and the next morning I got my LDL and cholesterol checked, and my doctor told me that I need to stop doing that. So it turns out fat loading works, and your doctor will tell you to stop. You know, I think that's interesting, too, because, oh, man, I... I was going to ask you a follow-up question on that and I forgot what it was. Maybe I'll think about it while I'm asking you the next question. So I wanted to talk to you about supplements real quick because there are three supplements that a lot of people talk about as having good evidence to support their utilization for endurance athletes. So the first one is bicarbonate. And I want to talk about the mechanism or the potential mechanism behind it because I think you've given some thought to these as well as I have, but I'm not entirely sure why most of these work. So maybe you've got some thoughts. So why does bicarbonate work for something like an individual pursuit or maybe even a kilo effort on the track? And would you recommend it for, you know, before a road race or something like that or a criterium? So, yeah, this is... This is a supplement probably that has a lot of evidence that it's actually effective in improving performance. So bicarb does, so the bicarbonate parts of the molecule, so it's sodium bicarb, that's what we ingest. The bicarbonate helps to buffer the hydrogen ions in the bloodstream, meaning that we kind of get a normalization of pH in the blood. What this leads to is actually because obviously pH in the blood is probably not as important as is pH in the muscles but by normalizing the pH in the bloodstream it create a bigger concentration gradient for hydrogen ions and this way you drive more hydrogen ions and lactate from the muscles into the bloodstream, and this is probably why you see an increase in blood lactate even at the same power output with sodium bicarb supplementation. So you basically buffer the muscles. Also the question is, I have actually yet to see evidence that acidity in the muscles actually impairs contraction. I've actually seen instances where it improves contraction force. So the question is, what enzyme are we actually helping? Because I am assuming it's, oh God, what's the one in, the second enzyme in glycolysis? I forgot. Yeah, I totally get it. So like, there is a really nice debate in the scientific literature about whether acidification is actually doing harm to muscle function or not. And I think I'm more in a camp of Hakan Westerblatt saying that it's the phosphate ions that are actually causing the fatigue. But I think the counter argument is also pretty strong. So I think to a certain degree, hydrogen ions also play a role in this. So it's not just the phosphate ions. I think to a certain degree, it's also hydrogen. So I think it's that. And also there is some evidence showing that acidification of the blood itself leads to perception of effort, I think. So combining components of lactate acid, meaning hydrogen ions and lactate, make you feel tired or fatigued or feel the pain. Well, because we probably have chemoreceptors for that kind of thing. Yeah. So I think there is a role in that. The problem with sodium bicarb is basically water retention and gastrointestinal issues. That's why I'm very skeptical about it. Yeah, because typically people are after they have a very large dose and they do their event. Actually, if they time it wrong, I've seen people run to the toilet even before their event. Yeah, it's a very big issue. Okay, beta alanine. Yeah, this is probably the supplement. I'm kind of really interested in seeing and reading the literature and reading why it's supposed to be working. So they say, okay, well, beta-alanine gets converted to carnitine, no, carnosine, right, in the muscles. And carnosine is supposed to be buffering, again, the hydrogen ions and then making... Yeah, the environment less acidic. But if you look at the literature and you find that perhaps that's not the case, right? because it's actually the calcium sensitivity that's increased as a result of carnosine. And that's probably the mechanism. But in all the textbooks and sports nutrition articles, you will find that it's a buffering thing. So we are always down to the lactic acid thing. It's a construct that we just can't get rid of. Well, I would actually ask you about that in just a second. But let's talk about the last one, which is creatine. I'm, again, I'm pretty skeptical here as well. But so let's say that it definitely something that like sprinters would probably benefit from where the weight is not a limiting factor. But also what I'm finding in the recent years probably if you're looking at the riders like Nairo Quintana his biggest problem is probably his body mass actually and lack of it because on the flats and on the time trials he just can't produce the power needed to like be competitive to the riders that are like 10 kilos heavier so perhaps what we want is actually a rider that has a High Relative and High Absolute Power Output at the same time. And I think creating can actually help that. It's kind of a risk you're taking. Perhaps you gain a kilo or so, but if you also gain the power, then I think that the goal is achieved. And this is probably one of the biggest misconceptions in training is that We are always just trying to like minimize the body mass and not thinking what an increase in body mass like functional body mass like muscle mass would do to the power output. So this is one of the things that people ask me about all the time and I actually really want to do a podcast on which is how does body mass actually influence power? Because a lot of people will say, you know, if you diet, you're going to lose power. But I typically find that this is because you're so glycogen depleted that you can't actually put out any power either at threshold or above. And so the big question is, like, what kind of power is he going to gain with more muscle mass? Because I would guess that he would get more power over threshold, but his threshold is probably not going to be impacted. I think it can also be like I'm a really good I find myself a really good example of this because I consider myself to have a lot of muscle mass like I'm 166 centimeters and I have like 64 kilos so that's pretty heavy for my height but my threshold power whichever it is it's probably above five point watts per kilo 5.4 watts per kilo, yeah, so it's pretty high despite my relatively high body mass, and what I'm finding is that I can easily be riding my first threshold is around 280 watts, and I can easily be riding with big guys, whereas if I had 56 kilos, I could probably have the same watts per kilo, but I would really be struggling on the flats. Interesting. Okay, I actually want to ask you more about that, but probably another time, because we've been over an hour, and I thank you for coming, by the way, and I respect your time, so I want to just ask you this last section so I can let you get back to your day. So you're a pretty outspoken critic of MDPI. Tell me a bit about what this is and why is it bad? Yeah, so MDPI is a publishing house from China registered in Switzerland So research in the past or when you as a researcher want to publish an article, you usually publish it in a scientific article where it gets peer reviewed. So in the past, obviously in the era when there was no internet, people were publishing in those publications that got printed and then sent away and then you had libraries and you went in the library, pick up a copy and read the papers. So There were a few respected journals that probably everyone was subscribed to, like Journal of Applied Physiology, things like that. But then when the internet came, suddenly we saw the publishers saw an opportunity to publish articles online. So you can basically you're not limited in space, you can Publish whatever like however articles you want and one of the things that we kind of as a scientist scientists want is actually to get our papers out and be published because as a result of that in certain countries for instance in Slovenia or like any Balkan countries you get promotions based on how many publications you do so these publishing houses found an opportunity in this. So basically, you pay for publication on in their like, let's say in their journal, which is an online one, you pay like some crazy amount, like two, 3000 euros for a publication. And what you get is you get it reviewed by certain reviewers and it's then openly accessible on the internet so basically those traditional journals remain to be the content remains to be closed so you have to be subscribed to it to be able to see the content but these new publishers like MDPI found an opportunity well let's not make a real journal let's make a website open access and then publishers I mean the researchers will be paying for the articles to be open access on the internet and the problem of MDPI is that they have this unlimited Amounts of articles so there is no selection whatsoever and there the more articles they actually they can publish the more money they make because the reviewers are not getting paid probably the editors are not getting paid basically the whole money is taken by the publishing house and because we all want these publications at least some of them They will just accept everything and the review process is really like really bad as well because as soon as you get an inflation on the numbers of papers that need to be reviewed the quality of reviews falls as well and it's not anymore the experts reviewing but some students and yeah just quickly glance through the article and say yeah that's fine and just so how can somebody tell if they're reading a paper from one of the journals in this publishing house, and how can we tell if it's good science or not? Because I'm sure they've got a couple good papers in there. Yeah, one of the strategies is actually that they invite respected scientists to publish their journal, and they don't charge for those articles. And this way they actually build a reputation, so they make sure that... there are good articles in there. So when I'm reading articles and just trying to make sure that like for instance when I'm in the topic that I don't know much about methods and stuff I first make sure that the authors are well respected so you can clearly see which very quickly see how many Publications they have, if they're coming from a respected university, how many papers they have in a certain area, not just in this MDPI publishing house, but in like Journal of Applied Physiology, Journal of Physiology and stuff like that. And then you can quickly see which articles are probably good and which are bad. And unfortunately, it's more or less the articles from like Countries that are not well known for doing good science that are most problematic. So what countries are these? Yeah, it's, I don't know if it's, I might be like biased or something, but probably like the states can, the English speaking countries, let's say, are pretty good quality usually. And the problems are usually from the countries that have this. like promotion system in the universities based on the number of publications. So let's say ex Yugoslavia countries, for instance, probably Spain is one country that I keep seeing bad articles from. Unfortunately, yeah, this Eastern Europe and but yeah, mostly English speaking countries are the standard is much higher. I think most people now think, and I would agree, that having access to more literature is good. But I think that there may be a disconnect between what we think of as good science versus somebody who just thinks that if it's published and peer-reviewed at all, that it's good science. So what could we do to potentially... Guard ourselves against bad science that's published wherever it's published in NDPI or just wherever. I think this whole concept of those journalists is I think very outdated. I think that's the biggest problem because reviewers are not getting paid for their reviews and then you start asking yourself, why am I reviewing this if I don't get anything from it? and we have this like probably too many papers out there at the moment so an inflation of science that's also a big problem and I think it's like a very major problem that I don't really know the answer how to like improve the situation because even like we get meta-analysis written on three or four papers these days and I find this just amusing and amazing how How can you even do a meta-analysis on three papers that everyone should read the original papers in the first place, right? But, yeah, it's a problem because, for instance, the article, the viewpoint that we got accepted this morning, if I wanted it to be open access, I need to pay $3,000 for it. So obviously as a researcher that I'm struggling to get funds for my research and now I'll pay $3,000 just for open access. Yeah, I think what a lot of people don't know is that you can actually Email the author of a paper and ask them for a copy and they can send it to you Yeah, that's we always do and yeah, I'm I'm a fan of I think that's the reason that my podcast is able to exist at all at this point. Otherwise, it would be, you know, I don't have the budget to read as many papers as I do if I had to pay for all of them. Because I probably read anywhere between five and 50 papers a week, and I assume you're about the same. Yeah, yeah. Even like with the university that has access to most journals, I still find myself using Sci-Hub very, very often. So, it's a problem and that's why kind of MDPI is also so popular because it allows you to publish open access articles straight away. What about journals like that are more open access like Plus One I think is open access? Frontiers. Yeah, so are other open access journals? You know, because I've actually read a lot of good papers in those journals. So, you know, is it just because something's open access, obviously, it doesn't mean it's bad, right? So how do we look at the papers and think this is good science, this is bad science? Well, I think you and I have an easier time with it. But like an average athlete who wants to read more of the scientific literature themselves, like what recommendations would you make to them? So usually when... As a researcher wants to publish an article you want to publish it in the best possible journal and best possible journal is not perhaps the journal with the highest impact factor but like the respected journal that has a tradition and most of the time you will find articles being ended in frontiers or for instance MDPI that got rejected at some point in those respected journals. So you always have to, I mean, I always ask myself, why did this article end up in being in frontiers instead of a journal of, I don't know, physiology or something like that. And you'll usually find a reason for that, unless, for instance, the authors got the invitation to publish for free there. But otherwise, they would. Everyone would probably like to publish rather in like those traditional journals, more respected ones. So whenever you are reading like an open access journal in like those online publishing house journals, you have to be kind of cautious and ask yourself, yeah, perhaps. Why did this article end up being here? And one of the things that I really like about, for instance, Frontiers is that reviewers are publicly listed. So, for instance, I reviewed an article this morning, and my name is going to appear near that article. So, everyone will be able to judge my work based on the quality of the article. Okay, so let me ask my last question to you, which is, How does a reviewer improve the article? Like how would somebody notice your work and your impact on the article? You can't really see it, right? But sometimes like reviewers can be like we see them like sometimes as our opponents or our haters and people that just hate us when we come up with an article. But most of the time, they just want to improve the article so that things that we haven't thought about gets picked up by them. So they are like third parties, not involved in the research idea, initial one and stuff. They usually are very helpful and sometimes they can improve the paper greatly so we are really most of the time very helpful for their comments but you never see this actually on the outside for instance like MDPI or I think even PLOS at the bottom of the article you can actually see the whole correspondence between the reviewers and the authors of the paper and you can actually check that and then actually see what the reviewers were asking and how thorough they were and for instance one of the criticisms I have for MDPI was when we published that article about cold body temperature and that sensor so we had I think three reviewers initially reviewing the article and we responded to all three reviewers one of the reviewers was very critical and kind of I mean critical in terms of like he offered his expertise on how to improve the article and we obviously responded to all three reviewers. But then because he was thorough and probably the biggest expert of them all, he didn't respond to our replies within like five days. And MDPI just disregarded and didn't wait for his reply and just published the article. Anyway, so just accepted it without him reassessing what changes with it. And this is also a big problem because sometimes you're waiting for months for reviewers to actually do their job. And I think that's just fine in the state we are. Take the time, think about it rather than push for the publication to become online and available in a few weeks. in the academic world that that is so highly prized and that things are in such a state where this happens a lot. Yeah, I'm pretty sad. But yeah, it's nothing probably we can do. It's just that this transition from paper to internet was just so sudden. Got people unprepared, so suddenly we have this big problem that nobody knows how to solve. Well, I mean, we couldn't even anticipate it. And if we could, what could we do? Yeah, exactly. All right, Tim, thank you so much for your time. All right. So once again, I want to thank Tim for his time. That was a great conversation. I'm sorry I'm not a better interviewer, but I am doing my level best. So we'll probably have him on again. There's always lots more to talk about. So if you want to check him out, he is Tim Padlogar on Instagram. And if you want to check me out, I am Empirical Cycling on Instagram. In case you couldn't figure that out, everybody did. We can AMAs in the stories as well. And Tim's stories are awesome as well. So really check him out. He's going to be great. Again, if you want to share the podcast, thank you so much for that. Reach out. If you want to become an Empirical Cycling coaching client, empiricalcycling at gmail.com. If you want to set up a consultation, we can look at your data, et cetera, et cetera. If you want to donate, you can do so at empiricalcycling.com slash donate. So with that, we'll see everybody next time. 