Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Kolie Moore, joined as always by my co-host, Kyle Helson. Thanks everybody for listening and of course, subscribe to the podcast. But more than that, please share the podcast, especially if it's helping you out. So also give us a five-star rating wherever you listen to podcasts. Thank you all for those. I just saw we have just about 200 five-star ratings over whatever platforms there are platforms for. So thanks everybody for that. Also remember that we are ad-free. We live on your donations and your donations. and of course your coaching inquiries. So if you want to donate, you can do so at empiricalcycling.com slash donate. And if you would like to hire us for coaching or a consultation, we will consult with coaches and athletes, both and even entire teams. Shoot me an email again at empiricalcycling at gmail.com. And of course, we've got show notes up on the website. I doubt we'll have any today, but in case we do, that is of course empiricalcycling.com. And if you have any questions or comments, please let me know. You can also get in touch on Instagram at empiricalcycling is me. and of course I've got the weekend AMAs up in the stories so please go check that out and of course I'm apparently now a meme account so if you like memes please follow along and yeah so we've also got merch empiricalcyclingpodcast.threadlist.com we've got some fun stuff we've got a couple cool metal stickers and yeah so what are we talking about today today A lot of people have been asking me more about FTP testing recently, and I've come across this quite a few times this year in particular, more than any other year so far. I don't know exactly what's going on, but FTP testing, even like the quote-unquote Kolie Moore test, which is how I see it whenever I'm browsing forums. The long FTP test, you start a few watts low and then you work into it and then you kind of ride to exhaustion or you do a slow steady ramp over like 30, 40, 50 minutes. So those tests can also go wrong too. And this is kind of what I want to talk about today is So what else can we do to find threshold that is not one of these super long and super exhaustive tests or even the super short and often, but not always obviously, but often inaccurate tests. So Kyle, let's get some thoughts on FTP testing in general and maybe just testing regimens in general. So what do you think and what are you hearing out there? Well, I think a lot of people Especially if you're new to cycling and you're trolling around on the internet trying to find information about, oh, people talk about power and FTP and all this stuff. Lots of stuff still point you toward the more old-fashioned 20-minute tests or even the two-by-eight-minute tests and things like that. So whether or not you, and a lot of those, both those typically come with the statement that shorter tests are better because they're Mentally easier and maybe a little bit less intimidating. But yet still, regardless of test format or like ramp tests or things like that, maybe that's even less intimidating because it might even be shorter. But people, I think, still get some people can get nervous. And so maybe they feel like, oh, I got to do it. I was going to do it inside. because then it's more controlled or maybe I overheat inside. Do I have an inside FTP or an outside FTP? Or maybe they think, oh, I don't have a good section of road near me that's the right length. I don't have a 60-minute climb next to me. Yeah, and so they get nervous. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And so you're like, I think even though as you try to make it easier where I think the longer tests generally do make it. somewhat easier. There are still all these little caveats where, especially for people who are just more anxious around tests, they can get themselves worked up and maybe still sweat a bunch of details that some people are like, I don't know, I just go out and I pedal the bike. What are you talking about? And so I think as much as sometimes as we feel like we maybe beat this FTP thing to death, there are still People out there who are still new to this, right? They're still coming in every time new and they're like, oh, yeah, okay, good to know. Or, you know, they maybe think that they're weird because maybe people aren't publicly asking these questions or sweating these details on a lot of forums or something like that. So they think, am I weird? Am I the only one who's ever been like super nervous before my, you know, FTP test or whatever? But yeah. Yeah, well, I mean, well, you and I both direct a collegiate cycling conference, so we know exactly how many new people there are coming in, like, even in just our little cycling bubbles. Yeah, totally. It's a lot. Like, we have, you know, over 200 D licensees this year, I think, in the CCC. So, yeah, so there are definitely a lot of people, but there's also very experienced people where things go wrong. I'm thinking of a couple people in particular. I could probably name four or five this year where we've kind of had to go this way. And so when it comes time to do an FTP test, obviously you do what you can, but like you said, there are a lot of nerves sometimes. And it always kind of surprises me the level of cyclist at which there are nerves about testing. It goes all the way up as far as I can tell. And so what I've had to do lately is figure out ways around the regular testing regimen. Because I want to be able to set the proper FTP like the next workout. And if it goes wrong, I want to have one more day and then I want to have a good FTP to like set that threshold. And that is my standard. I want like most of the time I want just one workout and At most, I want to spend two workouts on it because otherwise we could be making somebody really fit and not spending their emotional power and nerves being nervous for an FTP test. You know what I mean? Yeah. And that's interesting that you say, yeah, they're emotional. Like, yeah, like if you remember back in school or something like that, even if it was a... a social studies test or whatever. Yeah, some people get some serious anxiety. And if cycling is supposed to be fun, you want, you know, obviously there's some stress involved with racing and doing well, but you kind of want to minimize the extra stress on your life just as a general quality of life thing. Yeah, yeah, you're right. It's supposed to be fun. and the number of people I coach who get more nervous about the tests than any level of race, including like going to nationals or like international racing. You know, it always surprises me and it reminds me like way back in the day, I would get the same nerves more for testing than for actually racing, which is weird because like, like initially. I loved the testing, and I got super nervous about the racing, and then it flipped, especially as later on, I got more and more serious about trying to get results, and obviously, I wasn't as good at the racing aspect, and so I should have worked more on that, but of course, if you're not working on that, you're thinking about how much... How much more fit can I get? Because this is obviously the secret to everything. If you're not good at getting in a breakaway, obviously my threshold is shit. Anyway, so the point is I was getting more and more and more nervous about my fitness and every test day, this is the day of truth. How much time have I spent getting fit or how much time have I potentially wasted? And so I think, you know, maybe it's worth an aside here for a second. Talking about the importance of FTP as a marker for race fitness in general, like how important is it and how important isn't it? Yeah, well, I think we've definitely talked about this before, right? For very high level racing, a high FTP is sufficient but not necessary for good race performance. Whereas, you know, it's kind of like the ticket. Yeah, necessary but not sufficient. Yeah, it's necessary but not sufficient for good race performance. It's the ticket into the door. It's not the, unless you're, I don't know, wildly outclassing. like you're a brand new racer but you're freak fitness and you're in the fives or something like novices or something like that and you can just pedal away. Magnus Sheffield. Poor men's Quavin 3 field. Watching a 16-year-old just go to the front for a minute and drop this whole, this field of like 55 Cat 3s in New England. It's like, well, he just pedaled harder than everyone else. Yeah, and everybody who was in that race is just like, I quote-unquote raced Magnus Sheffield. Yeah, yeah. But yeah, so provided that you're not that type of situation, It's important, but obviously, as we've said, it's a big but not the sole determining factor. Like even in a time trial, right? Even in a pan flat, like 40 kilometer, 50 kilometer individual time trial, just having the biggest FTP is not going to necessarily be the determining factor. Yeah, completely. But it's a cool number, and so I think people get worked up. Because, yeah, you want to say, like, oh, how much you bench press, bro? Like, you want to talk about your FTP with your buds. So that's fair. Or maybe you don't want to talk about your FTP with your buds. Well, I mean, this is why the inflationary tests are so popular. Just apply a little mathematical lubrication with your anaerobic power, and voila, your FTP is higher. Guaranteed. Okay, so when it comes time to... Test your FTP. Like, yeah, it's a big deal, but it's also like not the end of the world. So I think, you know, for the mental aspect of this discussion, like realizing that no matter how your FTP test goes, it does not determine your race result. You always have to be working on your race craft as well. Even if you're just a time trialist or a pursuiter, there's a lot involved in that kind of stuff that you can always be working on. Yeah. And similarly, your FTP doesn't define. Like if you did poorly on a test one day, that doesn't mean that you failed and like all the training you've been doing up to that point like didn't work, right? Like that is a hilarious and silly way to think about, oh, I, you know, I, an analogy would be like, oh, I'm working on some big project at work and you had one bad day at work and you think, oh man, this whole project is ruined. Like, no, it's just, you had one bad day. It's fine. It doesn't mean that everything you've done up to that point is also. Yeah, and it's funny too because I coach a lot of people where for various reasons almost entirely off the bike, their seasons start to not go according to plan. The numbers start going down even though they're riding a decent amount. and body weight starts getting lost unintentionally will happen a lot of the time too. And it's like, uh-oh, you feeling okay, buddy? And then it's time for a discussion. But despite all these things where you would think, uh-oh, all of my markers of fitness are declining either slowly or rapidly, they can still go race and have great race results despite all of this. Just having that improved extra year of training under your belt, even if you're not in great shape, you can still go race really well. And it's funny because a lot of the time for not goal races, I'll treat it kind of like a hard group ride. Just make sure if it's got hills or something like that and somebody's going to be just on the edge of getting past those hills with the group, okay, yeah, we'll give them a little bit of rest. But for the most part... They go there a little tired, and that makes them think about, how do I conserve energy so I have a good result? It's different than just going there and having so much energy that you can afford to make mistakes. You know what I mean? Yeah. Yeah, yeah. And I think too, like... Hopefully bad tests don't shake people's confidence and they're able to brush it off. But that's also part of a sport where you have these reasonably, I won't say absolutely, but reasonably objective tests is that if you crush it, that helps your confidence going into a race or going into an A-level event or something like that. And if you did really poorly on the test, that might negatively impact your That makes sense, yeah. Yeah, that's a good point, too. If you are feeling really good and you crush a test, if you go super hard, it's not an easy day. Even you're like, oh, it's just a test. It's still hard. It's still a hard workout. Yeah. So I think letting the pressure off for a test as much as possible is like one of the best things everybody can do for an FTP test, regardless of what test you're doing. Although I obviously think you should do mine. And I'm not just saying that because I make money off of it. It's free. Just go do it. I published the protocol. You can't bill people. What? I see on your Strava that you did this test. Here's an invoice. Could we arrange that? No, I'm just kidding. It'd be like royalties. I get like a, you know, five tenths of a percent of a cent. Every time. Yeah. They send you a cut up penny. I'll smelt my own at home. Yeah. Yeah. Well, so I think, you know, heading into these tests, you know, also I think a lot of folks will do the test when they haven't had enough rest. So this is something to think about going in. Like you don't have to. taper for an FTP test for like two or three weeks, like it's a, you know, like you're going to Worlds or something. But, you know, you want to look at it in terms of, am I actually going to have good legs in this day? Like if you take four or five days super chill and you know it takes you three or four days to get your legs back under you feeling good and opened up, why would you do that FTP test that first day? So there's one aspect. The other aspect is, If you rest those couple days and typically you know you have a good day afterwards, you get out and you warm up and you're ready to crush a test and you're just not feeling it, you're like, man, the RPE on my two or three or four minutes at threshold, that threshold you had set previously, oh man, that didn't feel so good. Either you do a little additional warming up and hope that helps, or you go home and you just ride easy. You don't have to test that day. Because I think a lot of people will get it into their heads that the training schedule is very rigid, but they're living documents. Like a training schedule is made to be adjusted based on how you're feeling. And this is actually one of the things I hate about canned plants, even though there are some good ones out there. Well, I don't hate it, but it's a real drawback. that it's difficult to adjust and it's difficult to have the perspective of knowing how and when to adjust based on what you're feeling. Like sometimes it's like, okay, well today just go out and have a bad day. That's going to be okay to do what you can. Or, you know, let's, you know, what do you do? That's an interesting point. Yeah. You feel maybe if you are someone who gets nervous about tests and You can see that the test is coming six weeks ahead of time or something on this canned plan. And you get extra nervous as it gets closer because you're like, oh, no, I got to try to crush these workouts that are close to the test even harder. So, you know, so you do well or whatever. Yeah. Yeah. And that might lead to extra fatigue. You know, like if you're doing some threshold intervals like the week before your test and you're like, man, I'm going to add 10 or 20 watts just to I'm going to show these intervals who's boss. and cross this test next week. I'll show you how much fitness I've gained. And then suddenly you've got shit legs and you're going too hard. Or maybe you're going too hard on the rest of the week. You take a day easy and two days easy and you finally eat that pint of Ben and Jerry's or something and now you feel great. and she's like, it's just one short KOM. It's not really that big a deal, right? It's two minutes long. It's only so many kilojoules. It's not even the double digits. It's going to be fine. That kind of stuff can really affect you as well. All right. Well, so those are some of the mental and the resting aspects into a test. Best laid plans of pet mice. What's the phrase? The best laid plans of mice and men. Okay. So the best laid plans of mice and men, and I guess in our case, cyclists and triathletes. Often go astray. Yeah, basically. Okay. All right. Close enough. And so no matter how well you prep for a test, sometimes it's just not good. and there's no off-bike explanation for it and there's no on-bike explanation for it. And sometimes you just think, I wonder why this bad day happened. Sometimes there's no explanation. The number of times I've seen a bad day like that, I'm like, I wonder what happened. Kyle, you've had entire weeks like that sometimes. You're just like, man, I fucked up this week. You just give it to me again next week. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Sometimes you're just like, man, I don't know what it is. It's like every day you slept a little weird, you didn't even write, and you just whatever. One thing leads to the next, and you're like, it's Saturday, and I've attempted a bunch of stuff and feel like I didn't do anything. Yeah, so here's a couple things that we can do if all those things go awry. Askew? Awry? What was the phrase? Never mind. I should look at these things. I'm terrible sometimes with this. So the first thing I can strongly recommend is doing a blind workout. And by blind, I mean you have no feedback on power and you have no feedback on heart rate. You can do cadence. You might want to do speed, although, you know, changing terrain and wind and whatever, speed's really not going to help, but that's the idea. So this is what I've done that usually works fairly well is Sending somebody out to do 3x15 or 2x20. That's it. It's that good middle-of-the-road workout. Just about everybody can do it just about every time. And you know what it feels like. Or I would expect most people by now know what a 2x20 feels like. You know, you do your 20 minutes and you're like, oh, that was hard, doable, cool. Five, 10-minute rest. Do it again. Getting harder. By the end, you're like, all right, I'm glad it's over. That was some work. And you stop. And so the average power that you see for these, especially for experienced athletes and just people who listen to their legs really well in general, I would say 93 times out of 100 is going to be like on the nose for FTP. And this is going to be like two days after a bad day where your test went really bad. Like you started at that power or even like 10 watts below the power that you did for your 3x15 or 2x20. and those two days before you started there and it just drops for like 20 minutes and you pull the plug. You're like, what the fuck happened? And so if you go out, you know, a couple days later, rest, relax, go out, blind pace it. 90, yeah, 90, what is it? 93 times out of 100, this solves that problem. So interesting, right? Yeah, that's interesting. I mean, kind of sometimes in school you wish you, it's not, It's not exactly like giving you a redo on the test, but it's almost like giving you a you did poorly on the test, but we're going to go just have you attempt some problems instead of or just start to write whatever you think instead of thinking about the actual test itself and to see what happens. And then we're going to evaluate whatever you're able to do. Like, don't think about it as a test. Think about it as just another practice or something like that. Yeah, like or like we're going to have you just sit down with the teacher. and discuss this topic as a mulligan. Like, I mean, that's, you know, depending on the subject, I suppose, of course, you would be like, yeah, we've got a PSET. And so, you know, so I think, you know, something like this is such a good way to approach something like this. And sometimes, you know, you would see a number that's not as high as you would think it would be. I would say this is still the right number. Unless you've really got a bad power meter, what are those new rallies? The rallies seem to be not doing so hot right now in terms of accuracy. Across the board, 100% of empirical cycling clients with rallies are like, wow, these are under-reading by a lot. Sorry about that. I don't know anyone that's used one. Oh, well, thank you them. Okay, so here's the thing. This kind of thing can hurt your ego more than just about anything, right? Oh, for sure. Yeah, you're like, God, I'm a terrible cyclist. I mean, you think that often, and then you're like, oh man, I did terrible on this thing that like, maybe I didn't get a great race result, but at least I'll, maybe you say, I didn't get a good race result, but at least I'm going to go crush this test, and that'll make me feel a little better, and then you fail the test. Not fail, but you do poorly. You're like, what am I alive for? Yeah. Yeah, I am alive to turn gummy bears into... Entropy, yeah. Yeah, it's a heat. Well, as spritters, that's pretty much what we do. Not even watts, just heat. Oh, God, where was I going with that? Oh, yeah. So, I mean... This is one of those things where, like, I kind of learned this, like, way back when I was doing a lot of endurance training. I thought my FTP was, like, 295, 300. And in reality, it was, like, 270, 280 at that time. Because I would go out and do one 10-minute effort, and it was, like, an honest 8 out of 10. And so it was, like, it was definitely over the threshold. And the next one, I could not hold that same power, and I would struggle. and it would be like five or 10 watts lower and then I would do the same thing would happen again and I was like oh yeah that first one's definitely my threshold or I would like average the three and call it good it's not good no it is not good and so but I was getting close to figuring this out and it's you know it's only with a lot of experience and what might be charitably called wisdom although it's really mostly just experience and Trial and Error. You know, I came upon this solution and this solution works really well. And especially, you know, here's the other thing is like, I remember one instance, it's probably happened more than once, but I can only remember one where somebody tested really, really well. So this guy does like, I don't know, 35, 40 minute tests at like 300 watts, like 295, 300, something like that. And so I was like, great, we're going to have you train at like 290 for your threshold. And the first day he goes to do like a 4 by 10 at 290, I think he's going to crush it. It goes really badly. I'm like, oh, what's going on? So it takes maybe one more workout. And then I was like, all right, I want you to just go feel this out. I want you to go do this blind pace. I think this is the first time I had ever assigned it. And he was like, he comes back and he's like, all right, 270. That's what I got. I'm like, okay, 270 it is. I was like, what about the test? I'm like, whatever's going on, you are either not recovering or like something's going on. Like he had a really physically demanding job and mentally demanding job as well. So I was just figuring that. And that had a lot to do with it because the stress was increasing, yada, yada, yada. And I was like, man, it just must be like he's not recovered from that. But we've got to train. I can't rest the guy for a month straight until he's freshened up again. And so we just worked at 270 and it kind of came up from there a little bit. you know, the fitness did increase and that was the right thing. And, you know, I think, I think Tim Cusick once in the WKO5 Facebook group had mentioned the same thing of people like crushing a test and then like not being able to hit anything close to the same in training. Interesting. Yeah. I mean, it kind of makes sense too. Like if you, if you crush it, like that superhuman day, like you just happened to hit a day of testing and then you, you try to to extrapolate that back to being, oh, now I have to do this every day. Uh-oh. Yeah. Well, and you know what's funny about that is not a lot, but a couple people have started working with me. And one of the things that I noticed pretty much right away is that their fitness seemed to go up and down like day to day. Like it was an extremely high degree of inconsistency. like an apparent like 20 to 30 watt difference in FTP. And I couldn't tell what was going on. And it was because it was just so hit or miss every single day. And so I figured, all right, let's just work with the low values every single day, no matter what. And that was the solution. And this person has gotten much faster since. It's like you can't go playing whack-a-mole with those really good days because they're so unpredictable. You know, it's like you go out. I want to round up. I want to round up. We all want to round up, Kyle. Yeah. I mean, that's like the training equivalent as from I was like measuring from the taint, you know. It's like everybody wants. to have the biggest number possible all the time. In microns, too. Yeah. But, you know, in reality, just like, just face the reality that, and honestly, it's like better in the long run to, we're going to extend this analogy a little too far now, to use what you know you have well rather than and dreaming of something that's bigger than you want it to be or bigger than it actually is in reality. You don't want to over-promise and under-deliver. Yes. Thank you. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, and that makes sense too. Like in the long run, actually accomplishing workouts is going to do a lot better for your cycling than, and that means in this case, rounding down sometimes than being able to brag to your cool internet discord friends that you've got to 469 watt FTP or whatever. .20. .420. Yeah. Yeah. And so, yeah. So like, you know, like the ego taking a hit is, you know, in this manner is like, it's a big one, but honestly, nobody cares if your FTP is like actually 20 watts higher or lower. There's always somebody who's faster and stronger than you. And so just embrace it. If UFTP doesn't have a two in front of it or a three in front of it or a four in front of it, five, I don't know, how many have there been of those? Like one, maybe? Five, yeah. I mean, what era? Possibly the early aughts. Nobody cares. So, you know, being honest with yourself about these kinds of things is probably one of the best things that you can do for your future training and growth potential. So being realistic with yourself. Yeah. And I think this goes for I think this is one of those hard things to learn, too, is that, like, say you are feeling confident. and say you do feel good in a race and say you even if you did didn't did or did not cross that test or whatever say you're feeling confident in a race this kind of extends that's even more reason to race really smart and not and like sometimes I think when I had like felt really good and and going into a race your confidence would almost play against you like oh yeah I feel really strong. I've had a great week of training. I can cover that move. Yeah, I'm going to go in that break. And you're just like, but you think you vastly overestimate how many matches you have, even when you're feeling good. And so I think this kind of goes hand in hand with this idea that building up your confidence is good, but you have to be realistic with this confidence, whether it's on race day or whether it's about completing workouts. The the you kind of have to like cancel out the highs and cancel out the lows and go with like what is a sensible middle ground. Yeah. Yeah. And, you know, like what you said earlier, like the consistency is going to be one of the best things that you can do for yourself, because if you have one good workout like a month. or even like just one good workout a week and every other day you are failing something. That is not nearly as good as putting in so many other workouts. Like one of my favorite quotes ever from Mike Gisertel, like somebody asked him like, you know, what's the best way to, what's the fastest way to get stronger? And he's like, you know what? There's no fast way to get stronger. You get stronger by going to the gym three to five times a week for 10 years. And this is very similar to that. Yeah, and honestly, especially for something like cycling, like sure, everyone wants to talk about how young like Wout Van Aert or Matthew Van Der Poel are. Or Magnus Sheffield. Yeah, or Magnus Sheffield relative to their success. Just turned 20, oh my god. But like a lot of those really consistent pros, they didn't come out of straight out of juniors at 19 or whatever and just start crushing it, right? Like if you look at the development arc for... For Wiggins or even for Van Vluten, who now seems relatively unbeatable. It is not like they woke up one day, two years later, were like, I'm pretty good at this cycling thing. I'm going to go win a bunch of jerseys. And so, yeah, the bigger picture, thinking about season to season, year to year, et cetera, et cetera, with the training and even with... What is one bad FTP test in a cycling career, right? You naturally think, focus, and think about those negative low points, and you kind of forget all those times where you did crush a workout and you should feel really good. And every time you go out and you feel really good doing a workout and you crush it, you should hopefully be banking that feeling just as much as you bank that negative feeling of, oh, I... fucking failed this FTP test or whatever. I know, but- Failed. Air quotes around failed because you can't really fail. Well, I mean, people aren't like that, are they? No, not at all. Yeah. I mean, we have, because our lives are really good generally, I think. Like, I think we have, it's a smaller percentage gain when something good happens and a larger percentage drop when something bad can happen. You know, like we have a lot more to lose. No one, like- is startled awake at night thinking about that time that they remembered all of their homework and brought it all to school and turned it in, right? Oh, my God. Oh, God. Oh, God. Remember that time I crushed it? Oh, whew. Yeah, yeah, exactly. Oh, remember that time I got a 98 on my biochem exam? Whew. Which I did, by the way. I was so nervous going into that one and that I crushed it so hard but like actually this is kind of parallel because it was like having that one good FTP test like I am way better at biochem than I am at like aerobic cycling and so I had I was so nervous I worked so hard to like do well on that test and then I did and then I didn't think oh man I can relax in this class I thought oh that's what it takes to do this well I better keep doing that. So I kept my consistency up, even though it's easier to work hard while studying than it is to work hard while riding, because a lot of riding isn't working as hard as you can all the time. A lot of riding is just like, I'm going to go to a coffee shop three hours away, then I'm going to ride home. So this brings us to the other FTP fix that I have. So the other FTP fix that I have is to do 5 to 10 minute efforts at increasing power values. And you will know when you're over threshold. Somebody super anaerobic like me though, I would actually suggest, somebody less anaerobic. like less big anaerobic capacity, less big sprint probably can do like five to eight minute intervals. Um, but I would say somebody with a giant sprint probably wants to do like 10, maybe 12 or even 15 minutes, but you might want to do less of them, uh, at that duration. Um, start maybe, I don't know, 60 Watts below where you think your threshold is just, just for gets and shiggles. and do a 10-minute effort there. And then add 15 watts and do it again. And then add 15 more watts and then you do it again. And so by doing this and thinking about how do my legs feel? How long do I think I can hold this effort? This is going to be what I think is the other good solution to finding your FTP. That's not a test. The random walk method. It's not even random. It's like, you know, it's like towing the line. Yeah, like you're going to sneak up on this, and then once you cross it, you go, oh, wow, there it is back there. I definitely missed it. And so let's talk about the feeling that you get when you actually hit threshold and below it and above it. I mean, it's been a little while for you, but it hasn't been that long, has it, right? Right, yeah. Every once in a while I'll go out and, you know, noodle around and be like, oh yeah, that's definitely over threshold. So like, all right, so for you, what does over threshold feel like? I know when I'm over because after about 45 seconds, I start breathing a lot harder. Yeah. Even if it's, even if it's just like, you know, you say you're just like riding around town and you need to get over this big hill, right? Mm-hmm. Say it's four or five minutes, whatever. And you start off at the bottom and you're going pretty slow. And you're like, oh, I can keep going. And then it's when you click it into that next gear and you think, oh yeah, this is harder, but it's totally doable. And then all of a sudden you're like 40, 45 seconds in and you're like, ah, this is not, it's not. It's not an all-out sprint, so you're not like, I'm going to fall over, but you're like, oh no, now I no longer have controlled breathing. Yeah, the breathing going ragged is a big one to tell you that you are past threshold. And ragged and uncontrolled. How would you describe that versus labored? Labored but somewhat controlled for threshold? Yeah, when you're at threshold, you're very aware that you're breathing hard, but it's not like a... I would prefer to stop now. Yeah, it's not running away from you. Right, yeah, whereas once you're over, you're like, oh no, there's something, there's that little bit extra there that's telling you that you should stop now. This is not good. And it's also that I think you might feel it a little bit differently where and I don't know if this is just a mental thing or if it's like psychosomatic or not but I feel like sometimes also once you're over over threshold you're starting to use larger motor units you it almost feels like you're pedaling harder like you can almost like feel like there's more leg contraction or something because you are all of a sudden putting out more force and you've crossed this line where you're not doing it aerobically well I mean as people who for most of our training generate large amounts of force. We would be acutely aware of something like this. But you're not wrong. Physiologically, FTP above and below it is actually associated with a breakpoint in an EMG signal. EMG signal will start more rapidly recruiting muscle mass as you go over threshold. And it's not because of any sort of like... you know fiber type thing which we kind of covered in the last Wastock episode was that the last Wastock episode fiber type so so basically it's not like it's not like you go from like type 1 to type 2a or like type 2a to like type 2x when you get to threshold and we get that that inflection point it's not like that it's just that the motor units are becoming much more rapidly depleted. And so we have to start reaching for larger motor units. So whatever motor units were on that edge, suddenly we go over threshold and we can no longer aerobically produce all this ATP. We have a linear increase in demand. We have a nonlinear increase in aerobic ATP production. And so the spread has to get covered by anaerobic, which means we get only two ATP. for one glucose being split into lactate versus the 34 that we get by sending it through aerobic. So that's what's happening. So all those motors that are right on the edge, suddenly they deplete and the brain goes, oh, we got to get more. And so you can acutely feel, that's what you're describing, is you can feel the increase in neural drive and increase in contractile motor unit recruitment. I think the other strange thing there. Yeah, that's really cool. I think the other thing is sometimes you get tricked into feeling like, oh, this feels good. Because it's like that sensation of pushing hard and going fast. It's kind of a positive feedback. Like, oh, yeah, this feels good. When you first start up that hill or you first start ratcheting into that higher speed above thresholds, it's kind of like this counterintuitive thing where people have talked in the past. just because really, really high tire pressure might feel really fast or something might feel fast doesn't necessarily mean it is fast. And I think in this case, just because it feels good and like, oh yeah, like really crushing it, like cruising now, does not mean necessarily after a few seconds, you know, you know whether or not that's true or not. Yeah. Well, it almost reminds me of a long time ago on Reddit, somebody asked like, I can sprint at a thousand watts, but then I can't do a thousand watts anymore. Like, why is that? I feel like I should be able to, as hard as I'm pushing, I feel like I should still be doing a thousand watts. And it's not unreasonable until you understand the mechanisms of fatigue and just kind of how the upper end of power output behaves in that way. But it kind of reminds me of Maybe a month or whatever ago, I was doing some lactate testing on myself. And when I went looking for my FTP, I just kind of like rode a little harder as I went. Stop. Okay. Ride a little harder. I basically did that last FTP exploration thing I described with like five minute efforts. Not too structured, but because I was like, I'll know it when I get there. And I got there and I thought I was at like 200 watts. And I was like, okay, cool. So I'm going to test at 200 watts. I went to do the lactate test at 200 watts, and after about 15 minutes, maybe like 18, I thought, oh my god, I'm only going to make it to 20. It was like a very sudden switch. And then I backed it down to 190, and I went, oh, this is it. It was 10 watts. That's all it took, 10 watts to put me over the edge. But it took me that long to get there because I have that much anaerobic capacity, basically. So that's one of the reasons that sprinters need to be careful over threshold. And over threshold by that, I mean, just a little over threshold. Because it can feel differently for us than aerobic folks who will get there and not have all that anaerobic power to... Tap into like we do. But that's honestly, that's probably the biggest difference I've ever seen between anaerobic and aerobic folks at threshold, quote unquote, anaerobic and aerobic. Sorry, you were going to say. Oh, yeah, no, you just get duped into thinking, oh, yeah, this is totally doable. And no, it's not. It is not doable. Yeah. I think, yeah, I mean, everyone's done that. If you've done a ramp test and you get a nice bump, you're like, yeah, this is totally doable. Like, no, it's not. Yeah, I mean, and it's also like, it also is something, because I know you feel this too, like, except for like a full like kilo, when we do something like a 20 or a 30 second effort, it doesn't feel bad until we stop. Like, 20 seconds in, I am having a ball. I am... Still, I am like, I am contracting all my muscle fibers. And then I sit down and then like 10 seconds later, I'm just like, just like, just about mistakes are made. Passing out, like I should take a ping pong. So anyway, so yeah, that is really the biggest difference I've ever found between people like you and me and people with less anaerobic capacity and a smaller Pmax versus relative to their threshold. Because, you know, because when I'm in shape, I mean, my Pmax is like 10 times my threshold or more. Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Absolutely. Because you're rolling around at a massive 1.9 watts per kilo. Yeah. And, you know, And sometimes, oftentimes though, you know, I don't want to hype this up too much because I do not get paid by WKO5 despite the fact that if you actually go to WKO5 and you look up the about WKO, you will see my name. Despite that, I think WKO5's model can actually be fairly decent in this way. It might be plus or minus like 10 or even like 15 watts. it will be pretty close. And so what I would suggest is going in the right hand explorer and selecting last 30 days or something like that instead of like last 90, which is the typical look back. So it'll aggregate the last 90 days of workouts and figure out a mean max power curve, like the highest average curve from one to whatever seconds. And so I'll actually flick around between different timeframes. until I find something that looks more like what somebody's recent threshold is that I think and or slash they think. And so I'll start with 30 days, 30 day look back only. And the model will get a little weird because you might lose like some big peaks, you might lose some, you know, long stuff over threshold kind of stuff. And so, you know, so typically about 45 to 60 days seems to be about right. for a lot of people when their threshold starts to drop and you're like, oh man, what's happening? So if this is happening to you, look for something like that. And then you're going to want to look for all the other factors that might induce something like this. Look at off-bike, look at illness, look at stress, look at nutrition, all kinds of stuff. So this is like the last way to do it. But the first two ways, honestly, are the ways I actually prefer. Yeah, too, because you can imagine looking at the last 30 days or 60 days, something like that. If you've been doing VO2 max stuff, you may not have a good stretch of data in there, right? Or you've been doing a lot of base miles and sprint workouts. You're just going to have a V-shaped carved out where you would need the data, right? So yeah, you definitely have to be a little smart about... Have you had that maybe harder group ride or something that could maybe simulate some data in there, not just, you know? Yeah, because it's one of those things. Like, it's a model. It can only describe what it sees. It's not, like, predictive. Yeah. You mean it can't just scan you? Your phone isn't constantly scanning you, feeding into this WK05? Well, I'm sure my phone is scanning me all the time. I just don't know if it's feeding into WK05. Good, good That was going to bring me up to the very, very, very last thing I was thinking of, but I completely forgot what it was Do we have any wrap-up thoughts here? While I possibly think of this last thing Don't sweat the details on this test We talked about it a little bit with the rounding down, but for like four watts or something like that on your test. It doesn't matter. You're going to do workouts within a zone, within a range anyway, unless your FTP is only like 70 watts, like four or five watts one way or another. Dude, that does not matter. So even if you feel like, oh man, I think I could have squeezed out a little bit more, unless you think you could have squeezed out like 30 watts more or something like that, man, it doesn't matter. Yeah, I mean, and actually, I used to say that I like to assign threshold within about 5 watts, but lately it's been more like 10. If I don't see more than 10 watt movement, I leave it the same. That makes sense. And usually rounding down. I mean, for at least, yeah, power meter error, at the very least, like, yeah. Like, if somebody's got a 400 watt FTP, like, you know, a 2% error, like, you know, it better be more than 10 watts that we see movement, you know? Yeah. And just, honestly, If you, and obviously, yeah, they're drawbacks, but you could feel like you're just, it's just a knob that you don't have to turn. Like, you're going to assign them six watts more next week. Uh-huh. Like, it's just silly. Yeah. You know, it maybe makes you feel good, but. Yeah. And, you know, all this stuff doesn't have to be too complicated either. You know, one of my goals is to always simplify rather than complicate. Like, learn as much as possible. Learn what makes things complex. and then try to make it as simple and easy as possible. I enjoy that maybe only once in a, I don't know, maybe once a year, one of my athletes will write a workout down on their STEM and never, otherwise never. You should be able to remember your workout when you go out and do it. Every time I see people who have, yeah, have to write workouts out, I'm like, what are you doing? God. Yeah. I mean, I understand people who want to see it like visually. I think that- Right, but if it's so complex, if it's 19 different things, like, uh, it's a kitchen sink workout, you're just going to do- Yeah. Yeah. Oh, I remember the other thing I was going to mention. And so this is actually that- Excuse me. Once in a while, if you don't see an FTP bump that you're expecting, especially after a VO2 max block, this is one of the most frustrating times for some folks. And a lot of people have written lately saying, I did one of your VO2 max blocks and I finally got through this plateau or my FTP finally went up after years and stuff like that. Really, really kind notes for people. Does not always happen like that. Often it does, but obviously it doesn't always. And I've given a lot of people a lot of U2 Max work over the time. And so sometimes when we go test afterwards, we don't see any movement. And it's like, uh-oh, what happened? Oftentimes it's actually still fatigue. But as long as somebody's feeling up to doing endurance riding and can do like some sweet spot kind of stuff and that's feeling okay and we can progress that, that's what we stick to. and so this is one of the complicating things with threshold is like once in a while if I have an athlete who I know is really really in tune with their legs and can like you know just find their FTP in like like five minutes or less I'll let them actually most of the time I don't let people or I tell people not to sometimes they do but I tell people not to add watts to their threshold workouts so like Probably a good idea. Texas go willy-dilly. I added 30 watts today. That's not a problem, right? I mean, well, it's sort of like you're riding your bike along the edge of a cliff, but you don't know if you have like one meter between you and the edge of the cliff or 10. You just know the cliff's there. That's what threshold workouts are like, and that's one of the reasons that I'm so adamant about something like that. And so with a very small handful of athletes, I'll say if you feel like you can do more watts with these threshold intervals, you can. And that's one of those times where gradually we'll see that threshold increase with the threshold training. Because I trust these folks' intuition and their RPE and their being in tune with their legs. rather than needing to retest as they come out of that fatigue hole and get back into some really good shape and get into the training adaptations that we know that they gained doing some previous work. Makes sense. Yeah. Yeah. And hopefully, as you get... Maybe that's someone's goal that they become, my goal is to become so well in tune with my body that you can gently, gently, very gently add, gently add to their FTP workouts as they go on. Yeah, typically that happens a lot with very new folks and they'll go out and just ride hard for like 30, 40 minutes and like just, you know, bang out new. PB by like 10 watts or 15 watts or something like that. That happens all the time with people who are like getting into it or, you know, folks getting off the couch. Um, but you know, oftentimes people have been training for a while. It does not quite happen like that. So, um, something to watch out for, for sure. Um, anyway, so, um, yeah, so I hope that was helpful. So remember it's a blind paced two by 20 or three by 15 with five to 10 minute rests. Uh, it should feel like threshold. This should not be max efforts. you want to make sure that you're pacing evenly so that RPE oh actually I don't think we actually got to like RPE like at or under threshold a little bit we talked a lot about it over so all right so real quick to wrap this up so RPE at threshold like your lungs should be fine your legs after a while should be burning but like Kyle kind of like you were saying like Actually, I had this discussion with somebody. I forget if it was on a call with an athlete or in a consultation, but I asked, genuinely curious what this person would say, do you think that we need to actually go over a threshold in order to know what it is? I think it makes it easier, but I think if you... I think if you've done it before, or if you've gotten, if you're using multiple indicators, then maybe you don't have to totally go over to know that you've exceeded. Yeah. I mean, I generally agree with you. But I think that's one of the nice things about those blind pace intervals, is that you don't have to go over, you just kind of ride at what you know it feels like, and then you look back at the number and go, oh, wow, I nailed every interval within like two watts. That's it. I crushed it. But with the increasing intensity intervals, that's one of those things where I like that a little more for somebody who isn't quite as in tune and I think needs to kind of feel the difference between at and under threshold versus over threshold, which obviously feels very different. Even if it's after like only two, three, five minutes or even 20. Yeah, I would draw that to an example of like, if the stove is hot, do you have to touch the stove to know that it's hot? Or are you just able to get close to the stove and infer that you shouldn't touch it? Yeah, you can see the flame on it or the coils are bright red. Or actually on mine it says hot stove or hot surface or something. Like the light is on and it like flicks off when it thinks it's cool enough to touch, which is funny. But yeah, you're right. It's like you can kind of feel you're getting close sometimes, I think. So I would say it's a case-by-case basis on whether you need to go actually over threshold or not in order to actually determine what it is. So, honestly, I think that there's no wrong way to do it. Yeah. I do think, though, that, you know, this is not to say, even though I think you can, like you said, you can do it without, get there without doing it. But that doesn't mean you have to. If you want to go over a little bit, go, oh, no, no, got to go back to it. All right, that's fine. It's just, you know, more data. Yeah, for sure. All right, so, all right. Thanks everybody for listening. I hope you enjoyed this episode. I've kind of been thinking about doing this one for a little while. So we'll be getting to some more 10 minute tips because I am quite busy with ECCC. So I'll be writing more Wattstock episodes and setting up some more interviews for later in this month and next month. So anyway, share the podcast if you enjoyed it. If you know somebody who's struggling with threshold intervals or sorry, threshold testing. and also remember that we're ad free and your donations keep the lights on you can donate at empiricalcycling.com slash donate we got some quite nice donations this month thank you everybody who donated and thank you for all of our recurring donation folks as well you know who you are if you have any coaching or consultation inquiries shoot me an email at empiricalcycling at gmail.com we are taking on athletes I actually have a couple open spots right now have a couple inquiries and potential folks so they may close or not so reach out if you are curious about working with me our rates are We're obviously negotiable for students and for professional athletes. We know that you all have very small wallets and that's cool with us. We would rather work with you than not. So feel free to reach out if you want to sign up for a consultation. We will look at your data or not. We will talk training philosophy. We will talk physiology. We will answer all your questions if we possibly can. So shoot us an email for that, empiricalcycling at gmail.com. And of course, on Instagram, at empiricalcycling, we can AMAs. anyway so see you all next time bye 