Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Cole Moore. Thank you, everybody, for listening. And if you are new here to the podcast, thank you so much for listening. We love having you. And if you want to subscribe to the podcast and listen to future episodes if you like it, that would be absolutely fantastic. And if you are a returning listener, which I assume most of you are, welcome back. We also love having you. And if you want to support the podcast because you're enjoying it, remember that we are completely ad-free. There are no ads. This does not cost you a thing. And so if you'd like to support us, go to empiricalcycling.com. Donate, and that goes to the Microphone Fund and the Hosting Funds, and when we've got anything left over, it goes to Burrito Funds. So thank you for all of that. And if you would really like to support us, you can reach out to empiricalcyclingatgmail.com for a coaching or consultation inquiry. We are a coaching company, we are a performance coaching company, and we are here to support you, really. So if you would like to think about... Coaching, or you're thinking about a coach in the future, or you want to talk about your training and keep coaching yourself, that's great. Just reach out to me and we will help get you sorted. So if you would like to ask questions of our guests, because this is an interview show today, follow me on Instagram at empiricalcycling and... Watch the stories. That's where I put up the question box. And I also have a weekend AMAs for training up there too. And if you want to participate in that or just read along, that's fantastic. I've been a little slow lately between nationals and also I was a little distracted by F1 Monaco this weekend. So, so sorry about that. But it's been a lot of fun. And yeah, more podcasts coming out very soon. Sorry for the delay and all of that. I have been busy. But I have been trying to get back to every one of your emails. Having said all of that, what are we talking about today? Well, today, as you are probably aware, this is a guest who we've had on the podcast before. He is currently a professor of psychology at the University of Arizona. And what happened was he invited me to speak alongside another guest at one of his classes. And the class was called the Psychology of Excellence. And I think that's a really cool name. He cannot take credit for it. We'll tell you the story in the interview. But while I was there talking with the students and answering their questions, Patrick and I were both thinking this would be a really cool topic for a podcast. So we decided to sit down and do that. And we talked to him a little bit about what's in the class, what's the content, what can the average cyclist or the average person take away? Apparently, it goes a lot wider than just if you are a performing... Athlete or Performing Person. It applies to relationships of all kinds and situations of all kinds. And so I figured, cool, this could be very, very useful no matter what. And also we kind of get into the weeds about like the relationships between like language and feeling and representations and you know, it's inaccuracies and the fuzziness around the definitions and all that kind of stuff. It's really fun conversation. We also get into a bunch of your questions. And this is more to the end of the podcast, of course, but we discuss like race day nerves, and we discuss, you know, negative spirals, and things like that. And Patrick does a really good job kind of discussing the tools that he would be using to help somebody navigate those kinds of situations. And I, of course, ask him the burning question on my mind, which is, if somebody's doing well, do you, would you want a performance psychologist? And I thought he had a really fantastic answer. So without any further ado, let's get, oh, there is one more thing that we talked about that might be worth noting before you get in there, is we kind of discussed the stigma and overcoming the stigma of working with a performance psychologist. Because I think that, you know, these days there is something there still. But at the same time, Patrick and I, we are actually very aligned in our goals of supporting athletes and that we want everybody to be doing well. And I am more on the performance side in terms of like your races and your power up and things like that. And Patrick is very much in the mental health side and making sure that you are a healthy, happy individual. And we talk about... a metaphor of like building a house and that kind of recurs throughout the episode too. And it's, yeah, it's really fun, really cool conversation. So if you've enjoyed the episodes with him before, you will really enjoy this one. And if you have not heard the episodes from previously, you should go back and listen to those because they are really fun. So, all right, let's get into it and I'll see you on the other side. So the whole idea is that... The base of the metaphor is that building an athlete, developing an athlete and sports-specific skills and all that is a mostly mind-numbing kind of tedious process. The metaphor is much like building a brick house. Each step in the road to becoming stronger, to building your sprint, to building your endurance, to being able to handle in corners is in itself kind of like a brick in that it's innocuous. You're going to go do cone drills. You're going to go do long days on the bike, nowhere near your threshold. Each one, a little mind-numbing, a little innocuous, a little brick. At the same time, a stack of bricks on its own isn't going to stay together, so we need cement. For those pedants out there, concrete. To make concrete, we need cement, and we need water, and we need aggregate. And that's what's going to hold the wall together. And that cement and that water and that aggregate is going to be soft skills, commercial support, networking with others, getting rest. It's all kinds of little pieces that only when they're brought together and they're brought together in this very repetitive, very kind of boring fashion. Do we start to build an athlete that is not only sports-specific strong, but also has all the other pieces to have a house that can stand up to the storm of competition? And this whole metaphor of house building as like athlete development is usually distilled down to the saying, every day we stack bricks and carry water. No one brick looks special. Yep. Yeah. No one brick looks special. No piece of aggregate looks special. You know, just because you have Portland cement and water doesn't mean it's going to be strong until we have the aggregate, until we have the fiber, until we have, you know, until we've mixed it in the proper proportions. And eventually we build the athlete as strong as a brick shithouse. Yeah. Yeah, that's the goal. We're not going to get away with shortcuts, you know? That's very true. And as somebody who used to be in the building trades, shortcuts, like if you don't get called back, you did good. If you get called back because something's falling apart, it's like you did not do so good. Or you get called back to fix somebody else who didn't do so good. And that's usually, that was usually the case that we were up against. It's like, how did this person build this? You look, you peel the wall back and you're like, oh. Yeah, and the metaphor of peeling the wall back is kind of the first six months of working with an athlete, a new athlete. Scrolling back in their training peaks. Where are the corners cut here? Anyway, so I wanted to bring on the podcast again, not only because everybody loves listening to you talk about all this stuff and our really fun metaphors about brick shithouses and whatnot, but you actually invited me to have a chat at your class. And so why don't we talk a little bit about where your class came from? So the title is, where are my notes? Oh, here it is. The Psychology of Excellence, right? Yes. So where did that title come from and what does it have to do with cycling? I can't quite lay claim to the title. Like most of the class was my design, but the title was inherited. Before we started recording, we talked about like working with the things that we have and in the environment that we have. And I was given the directive to design a class using my expertise. because the undergraduate students here at the University of Arizona would probably be really, really interested in a sports psychology-like class. And universities are what they are as far as slow bureaucratic systems go. And so instead of waiting the year, year and a half it would have taken to get... You know, new curriculum and everything through the process to get a new class listed, we were able to piggyback off of a really old course listing from when University of Arizona Psychology was known for their sports psychology. And this course listing was this course called Psychology of Excellence. And I thought that was actually a great title for the course anyways, because my own training provides It biases me towards looking at sports psychology as like sport and performance psychology, or the psychology of sustaining excellent performances. And it's a much wider domain of practice than just sport. We're talking about many, many different types of excellent behavior from like excellence of... I don't know, a stock trader, or a writer, or a teacher. There's all kinds of different domains in which you can be excellent in your behavior and in your performances. And so I wanted to instill in the students this like, we're not just talking about sports. We use sports as a vehicle, but they got a much more holistic perspective on excellent behavior and the psychology and skills that kind of Serve as the bricks and mortar, so to say. Yeah, and actually, because you emailed me a bunch of questions before I joined, and I was there with another speaker, and just the types of questions that you started with, because you asked me for a bunch of media and articles and stuff like that for the students to get familiar with me and the other speaker, and I assume you've had other speakers come too. Yep. Some of the questions were like, I never would have thought about that, but I could see how my answer might be useful to somebody who eventually might go into sports psych and talk to a cyclist. So questions like, well, or just talk to a coach. Questions like, does not having a PhD affect your work? Which I have thought about many times that I've never had to answer that question. And I don't even think I ever even answered it in my own head. And the answer that came out of me was unexpected, actually. Or like, you know, what piece of advice would you give those making a similar transition or people who are switching to coaching despite a passion for playing the sport? Like, that's the kind of stuff that you ask. So like, so with that in mind, while you were teaching your zombie course that you resurrected from the dead, You know, what are the kind of big themes that are in the course, like for excellent psychological behavior? Because I assume that there's a lot in there that are probably like, you know, very like, you know, cornerstones of the field, but also there's like real stuff that's like niche to like, you know, performance situations. So since this is a standalone class, like not a series of classes, the design of it I tried to stay away from the niche stuff. I intentionally tried to provide students with the most useful core elements because most of these students are not going to go into sports psychology. They're not going to go into consulting. But I wanted every one of the students to walk out of there with very, very actionable skills. And so the context in which you and the other guest speakers came in was a career exploration context. I wanted to introduce students to both sports psychology and sports psychology adjacent career options. And the reason that, like, I can't take any credit for the questions that I sent you. That was all the students. They did the pre-reading, they had a little bit of time to think about the pre-reading and submit questions, and they did that. And all I had to do was cherry-pick some of the better ones and synthesize a few that occurred really, really frequently. So I got to give students all the credit where credit is due. They did the work and came up with some really rad questions. Yeah, boy, did they. And I was reading the questions for the other speaker, too, and I was like... Oh my god, she does what? That's so cool. I can't wait to hear this. I was like as excited. Like I almost wish I could have just attended your class like a regular student. That would have been a lot of fun. That means a lot to me, actually. That means a ton because I really swung for the fences on the design of this class and it was not your typical like university lecture homework kind of class. But you asked previously about themes and target skills and things like that. And really, the class came out of discussions with... I got told at the beginning of, well, when I got hired, hey, we'd like you to start our class and we want to see how it goes and maybe there will be more, maybe there won't. And so I went around to clinical psychologists working with athletes, I went around to consultants working in the performance domain, to many different people in my professional network, and I proposed the same question. If you had an undergrad student who was applying to work for you in some capacity, they'd only ever taken one college course on sport and performance psychology, what skills do you want them to bring to that application? I got a lot of different perspectives, and I loved it, but what I synthesized out of those different perspectives was kind of five goal behaviors. Soft skills. Most people in this field or adjacent to this field are working in consultative kinds of roles where they have no structural power. To navigate with peers, with supervisors, with those few people that might be underneath them, power structure-wise, in an efficient and effective and a positive collaborative manner, that's so key. So we needed a lot of practice and soft skills. individuals who could take scientifically valid data, or at least clinically valid data. There's kind of two levels of precision there. Clinically valid data doesn't always have to be as tight as scientific, but we needed people that could do good behavioral data observations. So we needed to give them practice in that. They wanted some sort of fundamentals of behavioral intervention. So we needed to familiarize them with that. Some career familiarity. I can't tell you how many times in those conversations the individual that I was talking with said, I had no idea what my career options were until after I started grad school. And one of them even said, I was in the bookstore talking with a fellow A fellow grad student who was coming in in the same cohort, and we were buying our psychology books. And I said to him, I looked at the books that we were buying, and they all said clinical psychology. And I looked at him and I said, I don't know why I'm getting so many clinical psychology books. I'm going to be a sports psychologist. And the other guy looked at him and said, dude, you're in a clinical psychology program. You are going to be a clinical psychologist that does sports psychology. Among all these themes, Because, like, before we hit record, you know, I were talking about, you know, soft skills for athletes, but, like, what else from this class do you think would be really useful for people to take away before I kind of nerd out on, you know, the kind of experience I had and fanboy out? The biggest theme that I targeted across all those goal skills was feedback systems, building feedback systems. Which we've talked about in the podcast before. Very much so. I try to be pretty consistent. At the end of the day, if we can build a system to monitor and measure something that's important to us, then we have a tendency to manage that important thing. What gets measured gets managed. And there's a saying that in the tech and corporate world, there's a saying that anytime something becomes a problem, KPI, a measure of importance, that it will become useless. As soon as you start managing it, it no longer is a useful thing. And I was really thinking about that the other day. And the truth is, the things that are easily measured can easily become useless. But when we can put a measure on something that is subjectively meaningful to us as an individual, and we can start building feedback. for ourselves that is contextually situated, it's still useful. If our thing that's most meaningful to us is getting rest, and we regularly measure how much rest we're getting or how consistent of rest we're getting, we can make actionable decisions about how we structure our days and weeks and travel and all that kind of stuff and our workouts so that we can continue to optimize for rest. But, if we're not measuring it, and we just feel like shit, we're going to be a little reactive, we're going to be a little more volatile. Less proactive? Less proactive, and less sustainable because of it. So there are plenty of things that we can measure that become horrible measures. Just about anything you find on Strava. We've talked about that before. It was very useful during the lockdown when that was the only way people knew how to race was going for segments. Right. But the workability fell apart as soon as they got off the trainer and it turned out that they were pulling way too many watts per kilogram for their handling skills. Oh, yeah. Those first couple races back were, whew, yeah. They were bloodbaths. I mean, similar to like the NFL, what they experienced after we came back from lockdown, you know, everybody had been training in perfectly silent stadiums and they were playing in perfectly silent stadiums and suddenly the context was so different that the cues that you wouldn't even normally really recognize as exerting stimulus influence on the player's exertion level and risk choices. They're gone. And so the ability to gauge risk, to gauge exertion, to engage kind of protective factors while playing, it was gone. And we saw so many ACLs. We saw so many tears. We saw so many concussions in those first games back from the pandemic in the NFL. I didn't know that. It was way more frequent. Way, way, way more frequent. And you can look at it across sports. It showed up in a lot of different sports where, I mean, cycling, it didn't show up that much. It did show up in handling skills, but in generally it didn't show up because nobody ever attends a cycling race anyways. That was fucking brutal. Oh God, I hate how true that is. If I ever, like, if there was ever any particular, like, personal... thing that I've got an issue with. It's every single promoter that only ever focuses on getting racers to a race. Like, own your venue neighborhood. Get the marketing out there. Go do door hangers. Get other people out there cheering them on, having a party, making an amazing race. And shout out to Colin Reuter. who in New England had published a guide of, like, how to make a fun race. And, like, he literally drew a map, like, do this, and, like, a list of things. And, like, you'd be, well, it costs some money to do stuff like that. You've got to pick the right venue. But, like, it's pretty low-hanging fruit, a lot of it. Oh, man. I can't tell you how many races I've been to where a promoter is complaining about the commercial viability of their race. And there's nobody watching. And we live in the world of spectator sports, especially things like cyclocross are amazing spectator sports, and there's not a single freaking spectator there. Well, not in the U.S. anyway, but in Belgium. Right! And that's also the proof. Like, this is totally aside. Sorry. Business, you know, inside baseball. Inside cycling. There is evidence that you can build cultures around spectating bike racing. And you can build very commercially viable cultures around spectating bikes and bicycling. And that raises the bar for the profession itself. Because you can pay players. You can pay riders. You can provide so many more amenities and still be a commercially viable event promoter. And yeah, no, there's a model out there that says we can do it. It's expensive. It's not fast. And it takes a lot of grassroots organizing. So I get it. I understand it's hard. But at the same time, if you're complaining to me that there's no commercial viability to a bike event, you're looking at your riders as your main... Income Source, and that's not where the money is. Yeah. I actually have been saying this a long time, is that most of the money in cycling comes from the participants and not the spectators in baseball. And that pains me. But anyway, I want to actually get back on the... Sorry. That's okay. What gets measured gets managed because I actually have been having an issue with a couple riders recently that actually made me develop new metrics in WKO5 that I took a guess. I was like, I think it's this, I think it's this, or I think it's this. And I came up with like, I have like a beta dashboard in there. that takes forever to load because it has all of my maybe this will work charts. And I have it up for way too many athletes because I'm always like, oh, maybe this is going to show me something. And so I'm always building like new little things that might help me with something or other. And like, I think one out of like 20 of them ends up ever being really useful, but it's fun to be in the habit of that. But what I'm finding is exactly this. It's like, I can now measure this one thing and now I can manage this one thing. And so I actually have a way better idea about how much different people can take of this thing and how much we need to see this thing dissipate between, depending on the way that I decide to make the chart to kind of match how they feel. And I'll go, okay, this is pretty good for this person. It's not going to be our only metric, but we're going to start to use this. And hopefully it's going to be like, okay, you need to do XYZ right now, or right now you need to do this, or right now the dose you need for this is not nearly as big as we thought. And those are all really excellent things to know. And if I hadn't been tuned into the feedback and willing to measure this thing, I would have no idea and we'd still be shooting in the dark. Yep. Yeah. There's always a technological challenge to measuring meaningful things. And so a lot of times with the metrics capture devices that we have, we will, oh, sometimes we just flog the data too far in transformations and trying to pull signals from noise. But every once in a while, we can do something novel, something unique, and come up with a metric that we're like, oh. That makes sense. And now if I use this in a prescriptive manner, I can start getting some different insights into training impact, into competition impact, into readiness, whatever it may be, without asking the athlete to do more work in the sense of manually capturing other things. We've talked in previous episodes about journaling and using prompts before and after exercise in order to sensitize themselves to did this workout move them in a valued way. But that's asking the athlete to do something, and that can be hard. That raises the barrier to entry. And so we're always, as interventionists, coaches, whatever you want to call it, we're always trying to find the ways to capture Actionable Proxy Measures that maintain a low barrier to entry for the athlete. That's a good way to put it. That's a really good way to put it. Because we can ask the athlete to count all kinds of different behaviors, and depending on how much we ask of them, there's probably a direct negative correlation to how long they stay our client. No, you're right, because I've actually found this with core exercises. The longer the list of core exercises somebody has to do, the less likely I are to do them. And the first thing I usually tell people is, if there's stuff you like to do, do them. If you want me to put them in, I will put them in. If you don't need that, you don't need that. That's great. But if I give somebody a laundry list that's going to take them an hour, after their main lifting session. So you've now got an hour of heavy lifts, then you've got an hour of core exercises. They're not going to do any of that. And I found the same attention span, or not even attention span, just willingness to do more for regular workouts too. Do this set, then do this set. A lot of times, that second set, that'll get skipped. And half of it's because people will go, I think I know that I don't need this right now. And with what we've got coming up, I can skip it and less is more. Other times they'll go, I'm tired, there's no way I want to do this, or I didn't bring in a food, or whatever it is, and they're not prepared for that. I think we actually talked about this in the last episode we did, where the energy required to make your brain engage with something else is fairly high. If I had a survey of 20 questions, that's going to take somebody only five minutes after their workout. After like three days, I expect to never see that thing filled out again. Yeah. Yeah. And there's definitely like a lot of my training is around like how do we use language to change the reinforcing aspects of that second set, those 10 questions, whatever the behavior is that we know as coaches is going to really help build the brick house. But that's a skill in and of itself. Again, using language to change reinforcing properties for an individual is not just, it's not easy. And just like you were talking about with designing a whole dashboard of maybe this will work kind of metrics, you don't know with each individual which one's going to work for them until we've actually worked them through a little bit. And so there's as much of a Risk, that we're going to ask them to do something, and we're going to put a lot of effort into doing things that are neutral, they have no impact, and at worst, they end up actually being unworkable for the athlete and their outcomes, and it degrades from their, like, it takes away from their ability to pursue their Valued Directions. And so we're constantly balancing that risk and trying to... You talked about if there's a thing you like to do, do that. I'll go ahead and add that in. That's meeting the athlete where they are. And the more we can do that, the easier it is to have a very complementary and collaborative coaching relationship. And so we might use language to... Sensitize athletes to elements of their experience that they're not noticing. And then we can still meet them where they are and make it more probable that they're going to do the second set or they're going to do the extra journaling. But we always want to be careful about that because if we push that too hard, the counter control. We were talking about this before the recording, that little tantrum kid. If we come off as like, you have to do that, that athlete, whether they, you know, they could be perfectly willing to do that, but in their mind, there's that little kid that's like, no! And they've got to live with that experience, you know? There might be another one that's like, yes, my coach has said I should do this, I want to do this, but there's still going to be that little counter-control kid that's like, no! Yeah, or there's the scientist that's going, maybe it's something else. Yes, yeah, oh. That was the other thing we were talking about, is the explanation seeking. We learn through social contingencies that to ask why is a useful thing. But we hire coaches so that we don't have to ask why. Because the coach has already asked that question to the point where it's useful. But it's really hard to sit with. That part of us that's like, why? Why? Why? Why? But it's not to say, don't ask why. But, you know, there's a point to which, like, the explanation is not going to get any better. And at some point, you just got to sit down and, like, do something different. And, you know, you're trying to steer the ship. And, you know, it's like, well, we know the ship's not going in the direction we want it to. So let's try these other things and see how that goes. And if that's going better. That's great. And if there's yet another explanation, we can explore that. But like right now, we got the ship pointed in the right direction. Like why do we want to change course already? Yep. Yeah. Explanation seeking is one of those rapidly diminishing returns kind of behaviors. Yeah. You know, the first time we ask, we might get useful stuff that changes how we respond to our own internal discussion about like what exercise should we do today. Okay. But the second, the third, the fourth time. It's probably not going to really change our behavior that much outside of feeling satisfied because we have some coherence between wanting to know why and getting some words about it. Yeah, well, especially if it's the same question. Yeah, yeah. If it's different questions, yeah, by all means, please ask away. And it's funny because that's one of the things I actually really encourage our athletes to do is ask us questions like, why am I doing this here? Why is this? And what are your thoughts on X, Y, Z? And we really love that kind of stuff. But it's really rare, actually, that it gets to the point of being a little much. It's incredibly rare, thankfully. But it certainly does happen. And actually, I wanted to talk about my co-speaker for your class, too, because I thought she was awesome. So tell me about Emily. Dr. Emily Leeming is a government contractor working with the Department of Defense, specifically contracting with various special warfighter units for projects that can be more or less discussed. She was wonderfully vague sometimes. Clearances can have a way of chilling speech, for obvious reasons. But Dr. Leeming, before she was Dr. Leeming, was my graduate student that I trained under when I was an undergrad. We talked, I think in our very first time on the podcast about the CrossFit athletes and how the language culture of CrossFit had a tendency to really drive these chronic injury issues. And yet when you gave them traditional psychometric measures about like psychological health, they always test it out as like perfectly healthy. That was work that she was doing, and I got brought into as my first introduction into psychological research kind of work. That was mind-blowing the first time you told me about that. Right. And then, if I recall correctly, you were developing a new survey that would hopefully ping better with athletes. Yep. Yep. And unfortunately, that did not get through the recruitment phase. We were targeting 100 athletes to participate, D1 or roughly equivalent, like amateur athletes. Like at 1, 2 and above. Yep. Yep. And that was where I learned that the soft skills, the professional network, are way... Way more valuable than just being able to write an email. Between my research assistants and I, we sent out something like 500 emails to various Division I and equivalent administrators and got absolutely left on read. Totally gatekept. My professional network, as much as I love everybody in it and I appreciate all the collaborations we've ever done, we could not really get meaningful kind of penetration into the target participants. And I understand why, but... Well, you're at a new university, and I'm sure you can buddy up to a coach there or two, and there's a lot of athletes there. We're working on it. I'm playing a much, much longer game. Because, yeah, it did just run into a stone wall of gatekeeping that first time. And obviously, I still want to serve the athletes in a meaningful and effective way and build the tools that are actually responsive to their needs. But to get to that point, my soft skills have to improve. My professional network has to improve. Just navigating that whole world, which I have been blissfully protected from having to do in the past. That's some hard things that I have to work through as far as my own skills in taking on challenging situations go. But hopefully at some point we can find that opportunity with a collaborator to run through that validation study. and get the tools to the clinicians that want them. Yeah. Yeah, I hope so, too. So, anyway, where were we? Oh, yeah, Dr. Leeming. So, one of the things that stuck with me the most, because when I saw the name and I saw the profession on the email, I was like, this is going to be really cool. But my first thought was, how does she navigate that world? Like, you want to talk about soft skills? And that was one of the questions that the students had, as perceptive as they are. And her answer was fascinating. She said, like, I go to the superior officer that I'm of, you know, like the unit or whatever I'm dealing with, and I establish a rapport with him. Usually it's a him. And by doing that, all of the other soldiers there get a sense of how to interact with her by watching that interaction. And like, you know, she establishes respect, she establishes some space, and like, and it's, I could imagine that there's a lot of ways that that could go wrong, or that could be done, you know, that could be done in ways that like, don't set her up for success, too. And so, and she seems to navigate that really well. I mean, and I was like, I wonder what... If there's any kind of equivalent for that in sport, with talking to superiors and establishing some kind of rapport that would let you come into a new situation, potentially with respect. I know criteriums are not quite like that, but I'm sure there's a lot of other situations. They're absolutely... is a parallel to that. And actually, one of our other guests who you didn't get to meet, I'll introduce you if you want to meet him. But one of our other guests is the head performance psychologist for one of the Premier League teams, UK Premier League teams. And they shared a very similar method of interacting where they intentionally build a rapport with one of the senior players on the squad. And once that rapport is trusting enough with that player, they then engineer public interactions that model sustainable interactions between players and themselves. The culture and the baseline stigma and expectations around working with the performance psychologist. There are a lot of those. It's a very intentional practice of establishing that the best person on this team is working with the performance psychologist. Therefore, if you want to be the best person on this team, you work with the performance psychologist. Instead of the idea, like I ran into this as an instructor this year. Okay, for all the college students out there, office hours by a professor are a time to get better, a time to collaborate one-on-one, and we, as professors, love working with students that show up to office hours. Okay, love it, love it, love it. And many times the conversations go far beyond whatever the material is and can be very, very productive on both sides of the conversation. Office Hours are so bound up with stigma around you only go to office hours if you're having trouble. That's one of the reasons I never went to office hours is I thought that was the case and I was like, if I have to go to office hours, I can't figure this out on my own. Right. When the majority of individuals that come into office hours, they're like 5% Trying to work a particular problem and get some more clarity. And like 95% want to talk about something adjacent, something that I may have mentioned in lecture, or maybe they're interested in a career in academia or a career in the material that we're talking about. You know, it's a collaborative conversation. And we love that as faculty. Like, that's why we hold office hours is to have those conversations. and they're always constructive. So, you know, college students out there, take advantage of the office hours. And they're fun. Like every time I have a call with one of my clients, I am really excited because I'm like, these are always great. These are always fun. Even if, you know, even if like I've made a mistake and we're going to talk about that, I'm like, I'm going to learn from this and this is going to be, you know, worth every second of my time. Even if it goes, you know, twice as long as I expect or longer. It's such a learning rich. Interaction on both sides. Circling back to in the sporting environment, that intentional work to model something other than the stigmatized version is a way to break down the stereotypes. It is a way to increase the frequency of those collaborative behaviors. I have a burning question, since you mentioned it. There might be a pill for that. Doctor says it's fine. So, it's that, you said an engineered social interaction, because my first thought was, that sounds really Machiavellian, but at the same time, I'm like, I know it's accomplishing a really positive purpose. So, like, what does that kind of interaction look like? Okay, I want to address the Machiavellian part. I'm sorry to add more stigma to these things. No, no, no, no. I really appreciate that you brought that up, because it can float out there as like, oh my god, this person is manipulating me. I don't want to work with a manipulative person. We have talked offline about this idea of workability. Whenever we're working with a client, many times we use our language to orient the client towards the workability criteria of whatever behavior is showing up. Is that behavior workable given your values, given your goals? Or is it undermining the workability of your values and goals? And in a similar way, if, say, that particular performance psychologist, if they do not engage in this sort of concocted behavioral modeling and example setting, Is that workable towards their job? You know, at the end of the day, they were hired, they're being paid a salary to help the team and the individuals on the team engage in sustainable, excellent behavior. If nobody is coming through their door, if they are having no interactions with players because every player is like, I only see the performance psychologist when something's going wrong. Then, that's not workable. Being, like, letting status quo be status quo is totally unworkable. And so, they have to engage in behaviors, whether it's these concocted modeling kind of demonstrations, or, you know, something a little bit softer. Well, give me an example of like a modeled, you know, demonstration in public. Right, so something like a model demonstration in public is going to be something to the effect of like, okay, let's assume we've built a history with somebody who is well-respected on the team, you know, very high performer on the team, and they trust us, and we've had a valuable relationship with them. We can then ask them a favor of like, hey, I'd like more players to see that we're working together. Would you be willing to ask me for help or ask me a question or otherwise have a collaborative interaction in public, like in the locker room, on the field? So everybody's in on it. Okay, now I got it. Yeah, both people in the conversation are in on it. That did not come through at first. And I was like, because I could see that going horribly wrong if you walk up to somebody you're working with and you're like, Hey, what's up? Like, can I help you with this? Like, in the locker room? And I can imagine if they aren't ready for that, they're going to be like, dude, fuck you out of here. Yeah, what you're imagining is such a massive ethical violation. I would imagine, yeah. And it's also entirely counterproductive to the job that we're trying to do. So, yes, in this discussion, in this scenario of modeling behavior, everybody's in on it. There's fully consented. Like, oh yeah, you've been bringing me value. I'm speaking as the athlete. You've been bringing me value. I trust you. I'd like other athletes to be working with you as well. Sure, I will engage in this concocted scenario. Or it's even better if it's just like, yeah, I'll have some of my questions with you out in the open. And we'll just have a rapport. And so really, there's nothing more concocted than permission to do it in public. and like that's the best version because then it's all natural, it's all regular, like this is the work that we're doing and now it's just witnessed by others and when others see that, a lot of times they see that the work that's being done is pretty innocuous, you're having a conversation of sorts, you're being collaborative, you're being helpful to each other, you're trying to enable the best. of each other. And that really tears down some of those stigma barriers. And you can start getting other people that, okay, maybe they're still responding to this history of stigma. And so they only show up when they don't think anybody's looking down the hallway where your office door is. Hey, that's still a win, because that's a notch on like somebody walked through the door. And now I get to engage in my job better. Yeah. We talked, we have talked on previous episodes about like, Linguistic Cultures, you know, going back to the CrossFit stuff, like, part of the reason that CrossFit has such a history of this weird training through injury kind of behavior is because it's such a social exercise. And so that social attention and Social Collaboration reinforces being there every day and working really hard, whether or not it's beneficial to you. When a performance psychologist is able to build an environment that is social, that comes out from the office and it's everybody interacting with each other and a performance psychologist in a shared language of collaboration and acceptance and commitment, you've just like 100X'd the efficacy of the work that you're doing. Because now, it's not just in a private context. It's now out on the field. It's now out. It's in the training room. It's literally in the soup, so to say. And it just becomes that much more frequent and that much more effective. It's kind of like a spin class in that way, right? Yeah. Yeah. If you're suddenly doing group work, Right. Because I was just thinking about, yeah, like, like cycling, because cycling is a little different in some ways, because it's like, because there's a much bigger team aspect of things. And so, you know, I know teams that have like had people race when they shouldn't, like through like concussions and stuff, because. their being there is going to help the team, but they're putting the team's goals ahead of the person's health. And so stuff like that happens, whereas in CrossFit, it's just like you just show up because that's what you do. And it's like you can decide to not go, but there's a different type of pressure, I guess, is an interesting distinction I was thinking about. Essentially, CrossFit is a single athlete sport, but there's so much of a social element to that single athlete sport that it's this weird quasi-team experience. And then you step into actual team experiences, like cycling, and you add layers of values. Because values, like, Values are something that are chosen personally, but then when you're talking about an organization or a team, they have a set of values that they're in pursuit of. And normally, normally, that's a horrible term, many times. More precise with the language, as always. Oh, yeah, that's very true. That's very true. Good catch. Many times. Team values and individual values have some overlap, but they're not perfectly synchronized. And either the team has made a choice to bring in somebody knowing that there's going to be some values conflict, or the individual has made a choice to join a team knowing there's some overlap and some conflict. And so there's always, whether it's active or ignorant, compromise of values. If the conversation is done well around that compromise and the skills of recognizing and actively engaging in values compromise, then it's easier to acknowledge like, hey, this is the direction that the team wants to go. This is where our athletes are at. These athletes are willing to take that risk right now. This athlete should probably be sat out because they just had a concussion. Whatever it may be, it is easier to have those hard decisions about the compromise. Many organizations never go through that discussion about values and compromise, and so their only measure is wins or commercial coverage. And so that's the metric that gets managed, and the compromise happens by ignorance. I mean, and actually, that's one of the things that I always tell people on on teams who have some influence in the team's direction. Decide the goals and the values of the team while you are sitting there in the off-season. Plan this stuff out because when you are there in the heat of the moment, you will make very different decisions. And if you've got a decision tree in place that you made very soberly and coldly with deliberation, That's very different. It's sort of like people who will finish a tour stage when they've clearly been concussed and they need to hop in the ambulance and just stop because they want to help the team. But if you've got a protocol in place, like if your helmet looks like it's just been through a grain silo, you probably should not continue the stage. And then you've adhered to your protocol and that kind of stuff. helps people all the time. And so, where was I going with that? Compromise values, individual values, team values, compromise between the two. Oh, yeah. Did you ever, actually, real quick, did you ever see that meme? It's not even a meme. It's like, the cyclist, like, all bloodied up and bandaged, like, riding, it's like, because, and then, versus, like, the soccer player who's, like, not even injured, lying on the ground, like, pretending he's got an injury. And it was like, both of these people are doing this thing because they want to help their team. Like, it's the same goal, but depending on, you know, the context, like one person's trying to get the other person to foul. I don't know how it works in soccer. Yes, that's exactly right. Okay. Or like a card, like a joker or an ace or whatever they card. whatever the cards are in soccer or yellow and red. Are there green cards or is that just immigration? I don't know. I know a lot about a very small area of the world. So anyway, I was just curious if you had ever seen that and had any thoughts on it. I hadn't seen that, but that aligns with the conversation about like Action has function. And there are many different shapes of action that have the same function. And so if the function is benefit the team across different sports, and even within different sports, we can see many, many different expressions of that function. from the bandage athlete continuing to ride to the athlete putting on their best Oscar-worthy performance of an injury. Yeah. And that's where exactly as you said, like the going through the discussion in the offseason at a period where it's safe. To really think through what's important to the organization in a long-term manner and to think through what's important to the individual in a long-term manner and get those systems in place to try and put a thumb on the scales of in the heat of the moment, that's really, really important. Because otherwise, the easy decision is many times the less sustainable decision. You know, like an athlete, a cyclist on a multi-day tour of some sort, you know, a race, a stage race. In any given stage, they have the easy choice to just leave it all out on the stage, 100%. That's the easy choice, and in the heat of the moment, many athletes do that. But we know from experience that that can undermine team goals, and even the athlete themselves' long-term goals, because maybe their goal is to finish the stage race, or maybe their goal is to win a points classification of one type or another, which requires this repeatedly competitive level. That's not going to be available to them if they just gut themselves on the first stage. And so taking that time to intentionally early on get clear on what's important, get clear on the conditions under which they are likely to compromise the important thing for the immediate thing and put the protocols in place to protect them from themselves, that's really worth the investment. But it's also the hard road. And most teams don't do that. Most athletes don't do that. And we see unsustainable behavior. Maybe this is a dumb question, but is that something that like a performance psychologist would like be able to help an athlete work on? Absolutely. Like that's the core of the services that I would usually provide for an athlete is clarifying personal values and identifying behaviors in contexts that are important to those personal values that either move them towards or away. from their personal values. Like, that is the meat and potatoes of what I do, and then the rest of it is building the skills, the ancillary skills to support engaging in valued behavior, even when it's not the easy, not the comfortable kind of thing. And that goes back to, like, the course and building the feedback systems. You know, if you identify that a valued outcome is X, Y, and Z, and you figure out the hard way to measure X, Y, and Z or you take the time to invest in figuring out the easy way to measure it but you've taken the time which is expensive you have built the systems to undermine the easy choice in the heat of the moment and so now you have a metric that says if I do the Turn Myself In and Out on this stage, my number, my, you know, approaching valued outcomes kind of number goes down. I don't want that number to go down, so I'm going to do the thing that makes the number go up. Suddenly, it's way easier to make the hard choice. It's almost like gamifying it in that way. It absolutely is. It's not almost, it is. A performance psychologist, if they can turn Doing the sustainable thing, doing the meaningful thing into a fun game, they've won. And it's not even a fight. They've won in the most collaborative and enjoyable way possible. Because as soon as you can flip the client's linguistic behavior around the choice, from it's easy for me to do the unsustainable thing to it's enjoyable for me to do or it's meaningful for me to do the sustainable thing. Suddenly, the behavioral probabilities in that moment have changed and the client becomes more frequently able to engage in the behavior that is sustainable, that is meaningful. And there's our workability. I mean, because one of my questions for you was like, you know, how it's Someone who's even doing well benefit from a performance psychologist, but like, I think you kind of just answered that. So like, give me another one. And what other ways could you help somebody who's doing well, you know, let alone somebody who's like struggling with something? Because we got some, a couple of listener questions of people who are struggling with things, and I want to get to those in a minute. Right. Yeah. So, so well, doing well is a contextually anchored evaluation. Here we go with the nerd talk again. No, no, no, no. Yes, it is nerd talk. But that's the thing. Like any sort of evaluative... Let me put that in plain language because you already said this before we started recording. To each their own success metrics. Yes. To each their own success metrics in the place in which it is successful. And that's the other part. Or the place or the role. Okay. Because we wear many hats. You're Coley the coach. You're also Coley the partner. You're also Coley the watch worker-runner. It was only an Omega A61. It was not a big deal. Not a big deal at all. You know, I am Patrick the performance psychologist. I'm Patrick the university faculty member. I'm Patrick the partner. I'm Patrick the dog parent. Each one of those roles has different success metrics. And at times, those success metrics are in conflict with each other. And a performance psychologist can help an individual both identify the performance success metrics in each of those roles, the real meaningful values, and build the skills so that even if They're successful in one and recognizing that there's something they would like to pursue in another. They can have the satisfaction of sitting with the compromise in order to move in a valued direction in those other roles. Prior to starting recording, we talked about how language can be a black hole. It can consume all of our time as we try to be more and more precise with language. of that time are those other roles that we like to serve. If Coley, the coach, is bound up and being eaten alive in time by coming up with explanations, then Coley, the partner, can't show up. Or Coley, the watch tinkerer, can't show up. It's fixed now, it's fine. But yeah, I get it. Yeah, and so when people are asking, like, I'm doing really well, why would I need a performance psychologist? Well, the first question is, in what role are you doing well in? And what other roles would you like to be doing well in? And I could guarantee every single person that's listening right now, at least one other role has just popped in their head of being like, I really wish I was better in this role. And that's where the performance psychologist could help. And actually, one of the last things that was asked in your class for both me and Emily was about a time that talking with an outside consultant had helped what we do. And she had a great answer. And my answer, I actually thought, was like, kind of a cop-out, because I pretty much said, this is where I recognize my own limitations, and I'm going to refer somebody outside of, you know, empirical cycling, because, like, we don't have somebody who does X, Y, Z. We don't have, we can't have somebody who does literally everything in the organization, and this is one of the things where, like, I had to say, I send people elsewhere. I make sure, and, well, not really send people elsewhere, but like, The way I think about it is like we're making a performance team. So like, you know, we've got the athlete and we've got me and then we've got nutritionists. Sometimes we've got a physical therapist, you know, psychologist. We've got, you know, the list goes on and on and on and on. Everybody's, you know, DS, performance manager for the team. Like, you know, we could have like a 10-person meeting for one client if we really wanted to. Yeah. And so I was kind of fascinated by the difference of that, because I used to want to do everything myself. And at this point, there's no way I could even crack open a book about performance psychology and get anything from it other than a very cursory understanding, and it's not going to make me as good at my job as somebody like you. And so that's why. I wasn't even really sure when we started this conversation. These are all questions of my own ignorance. I wasn't really sure how a person doing well would benefit from a performance psychologist, and now I know. So I really, really appreciate what you do. Thank you very much. And I think your clients, I assume clients and listeners appreciate what you do in recognizing that you're Koli the coach. You're not, Cole, the performance psychologist. You're not, Cole, the nutritionist. I tell people straight up when we start, I suck at a lot of stuff, not only just in these aspects, but in life. I'll tell people, I'm not a good motivator. If you need me to text you in the morning to get you on the bike, you need another coach. I cannot do that. Yeah. Yeah, there's, as you're talking about this, a really old memory comes to mind. When I was a kid, I used to be fascinated with Swiss Army Knives. If you don't know what that is, for the listeners out there, it's a pocket knife with a bunch of folding attachments. You know what they call them in Switzerland, right? An Army Knife. An Army Knife. I suspect in Switzerland they call them crap, because that's what they are. I was fascinated by the idea of the multi-tool in general. And I was talking to my dad one day, and he said, here's the thing about multi-tools. Because so many different tools have to be packaged inside this thing, the carrier of whatever, none of the tools are particularly good. And so, similar to the multi-tool, when we are trying to be professionals, If we chase the multi-tool role, to be the coach, to be the nutritionist, to be the aerodynamicist, to be the DS, we will always have to compromise so much on each role that we're really going to be kind of garbage at all of them. And so those individuals who can get comfortable with becoming a specialist, only a coach, only a nutritionist, and can get comfortable With owning their pride when it comes to like, this is something that we need to bring a nutritionist in on. This is something we need to bring a performance psychologist in on because that's not my specialty. You can go further and faster as a team because each of you are excellent at the thing you specialize at than the individual who's trying to be the Swiss Army knife, who's trying to be the multi-tool. and can only develop the shittiest little leather awl and a knife that you can't even slice a banana with. And so when you are building the brick shithouse of the athlete, if you're the handyman, that shithouse is going to fall over. And if you bring in a mason, you bring in a carpenter, you bring in a plumber, you bring in an electrician, you bring in the roofers, they've all really honed their individual crafts. And you can do it better? And you can do it faster, and it's going to last longer. It's more expensive, but it's worth the investment. It's more expensive, it's worth the investment, and at the end of the day, because the athlete is working with each individual specialist, they may not actually need to hire them for as long. They're going to pay more up front, but they're going to get something better that is more sustainable, they're going to learn faster, and then they can move to an equilibrium that is maintainable. Or, alternatively, they're going to get good enough that they are a commercially viable athlete. and they can afford to have that team continue to sustain them and they can specialize in being an athlete. That's not going to be a ton of our listeners but it will be a few. I know of quite. Right. But at the same time actually speaking of value directions because I mean this is one of the things that happens when people email me like hey looking for coaching you know we talk a little bit and like some people are like well I have I also want to do like bodybuilding I also want to lose some weight I also want to do this and the other thing. And, you know, and I actually emailed with them quite a bit about like, well, maybe for me, right now you should hire the nutritionist and not us and then like come back to us in a year when you've lost some weight or, you know, or like when you've like finished your bodybuilding show in like 12 months, like then you can, when you're done with that, come to us for cycling stuff. And in the meantime, like do these three simple workouts or something like that. And so like, cause you know, Not everybody has unlimited bandwidth or funds for all this stuff. And so I guess I am a very amateur psychologist in helping people find valued directions, as you would say. Yeah. And I mean, that's the case with every professional. Like, we never know. So in help-seeking kind of ecosystem, we talk about the triage experience. Triage is the moment in which an individual seeking help actually comes in contact with something in the professional ecosystem, and that something hopefully helps guide them towards more targeted services. And that moment of evaluation and guidance is the triage moment. The word comes out of the emergency room. Somebody comes into the emergency room saying, like, I... Have a Thing. And the person in admitting is like, okay, describe your thing. And after going through a screening method, they can either say, all right, this person is... Nowhere close to dying, we can have them sit on a chair for a while and bring a specialist in, or they can see somebody when they're available in a non-emergency kind of manner, while we serve this person who has a bone sticking out of them, you know, or just rolled in on a cart because they're not even responsive at the moment, you know, these are triage decisions for each of those individuals, what service to whom is going to be, and when is going to be the most effective, and so every professional has to, Especially when they're a frontline professional that's going to see people for the first time, has to have some sort of triage skills. So you do have to be a tiny bit of a psychologist. You do have to be a tiny bit of a nutritionist. And mostly that comes from working with those specialists to know, like, what are the questions that I need to ask so that I can triage this individual into the place that's going to be most useful for them at this time? Really interesting perspective. And I had never really considered it like that. And every time we talk, I feel like I've got this meta-contextual view of my own job. And then for the next three months as I do my job, I'm like, oh, is this like that thing we talked about? That's so cool. But I really want to get to some listener questions because we've got some bangers here. And I'm sure that these are actually very common questions. And especially for my experience with athletes, these are very common questions. Like, here's the first one submitted. I'm sorry for this person, by the way, but how do you get out of a negative mindset after a streak of bad performances? There's a lot more like this, so. Yeah, yeah, yeah, no, I really appreciate this question. You never have to apologize for your listeners sending in questions. Every time somebody's in a bad spot, I'm like, oh God, I'm so sorry that you're in this situation. You know, like whenever somebody reaches out for coaching and they're like, I'm in this bad spot, I'm like, I wish it were different circumstances. I'm so sorry for this, but let's try to get you sorted. Of course, but let's also celebrate the fact that they sought help. Fair, yeah. I have to teach so many, in my intro psych class, I teach so many people about the fact that like, of those people who may become aware of an issue, only a portion of them are ever going to seek help. And that is a tragedy. So, let's celebrate that you have listeners that are asking questions, and that's awesome. How do we get out of a negative mindset? This is going to sound a little strange, because it's not intuitive, but... 

In the past, I'm going to put some context to this. In the past, when it came to psychology, we would have said something like, well, you have to fake it till you make it, act happy until you are happy kind of stuff. But there's this problem. See, thoughts, feelings, emotions, mindsets, these are all linguistic issues. These are all linguistic phenomena. And the way we learn language is social. It's a really strange process when you think about it, but let me put it this way. You learned to say that you were having indigestion because at one point you may have thrown up in front of somebody else and they were like, oh, your stomach is upset. Or you may have looked a little bit pale and green and said that you were feeling discomfort around your stomach. You were kind of holding on to your stomach. And somebody else witnessed these behaviors, these externally visible symptoms, and said, oh, your stomach is upset. So we've put the word to the thing to roughly match. Put the word to the thing to roughly match. But the roughness is the fact that some of that experience is private to you. You cannot make somebody feel the thing that you feel. Oh. And so there's always... Yeah, it's exactly like... There's always a degree... Nobody sees the same color red. Bingo! Exactly like that. So there's always a degree of ambiguity in our language because of how we socially learn language. When we think about thoughts, feelings, and emotions as a linguistic phenomenon, that means that when we have the thought that we're wrong, or we're right, or this is blue, or whatever it may be, it's not... Totally Accurate! There's no guarantee that it's accurate, and it's actually probable that it's pretty inaccurate. And the more private the experience that we're trying to put the words to, the more likely the words are a very rough match. And so, when we're having what we would call a negative mindset, where we're grinding on ourselves about like, you failed, you failed, you failed, you failed, whatever it may be. There's two elements to that experience. There's the words, you failed, you failed, you failed, you failed, you failed. And there's the sensation of a strong emotional response. In my training, we hold lightly to the words, and we notice the strength of the emotional response. And when we are having a strong emotional response, we notice, hey, there's something valuable in here to me. The words may not know what it is or how it is, but the strength of the response suggests there's something important in here. And so this is going to sound super unintuitive, but holding lightly to the words, the criticism track that's going on. and recognizing that we're getting a signal that there's something important in that experience can allow us to use those feelings in a sustainable way to signal things that are important to us and chase and get clarity on what about it is important. As an athlete, Many times we are pursuing things that are both in service of ourselves and in service of teams or family members or supporters, whatever it may be. And one possible example of a situation where like, oh, I didn't get it on the podium for these five events. Now I've got that criticism track playing. The important nugget in there might be like, I'm trying to realize a value as a competitor, as an individual. and I didn't get the validating experience of like, I am a competitor, you know, the people on the podium are the only competitors and everybody else isn't, you know, maybe we have some rules showing up about that. We've talked about rule-governed behavior in the past. Please listen to previous episodes about rule-governed behavior. So we've got some rules that are going on that are causing some, that are evoking a critical Track about violating those rules. We're getting a strong emotional response around, like, I'm not a competitor. I want to be a competitor. Or whatever it may be. I'm not supporting my family. I'm not moving towards commercial viability as an athlete. I'm not contributing to the team. Contributor, supporter, competitor. Those are the things that are actually meaningful to us. Having that moment of strong emotional response is actually a really, really valuable and meaningful signal. And so one of the ways that we can work with that signal is by saying, okay, there's something important here. What is the thing that I'm trying to pursue that this is signaling importance of? And how can I better Construct process metrics that make it clear whether I'm moving towards or away from that thing that is important. So whether we are elated or just gutted or any number of other, you know, really angry or really frustrated or whatever it may be, those are all the content of that could be really, really like totally Out in left field compared to what's important, but the strength of the response, that's what tells us there's something meaningful there. And so by going into the strength, net exploring why is it important, that can help us come out the other side, being able to work with our emotions in a constructive and sustainable manner. I like that because it's like, It's not just like this is a bad thing. How do I  because I think it's like people usually focus on that emotion and the negativity rather than trying to dig around like what's the mechanism behind it. And that appeals to me as somebody who's always interested in the mechanism behind everything. And so I think that, you know, if you're a fan of this podcast, I think that's probably going to hit really well with you. And I think  I had another thought. I forgot it. Oh yeah, please, go ahead. I have an anecdote from my own performance experience that might help bring this, land this plane just a little bit. When I was pursuing professional paintball, we... Professional paintball? Yeah. That's kind of cool. I think it was cool. I spent like eight, nine years of my post-high school life traveling around the country doing it. Yeah. But that sport is based around round-robin and elimination tournaments, and so Sunday was finals day. If you made it to Sunday, you were in your top 10, top 8, top 4, whatever it may be. And I could, like clockwork, when we'd make it into Sunday, I wouldn't be able to eat, I wouldn't be able to sleep, I'd be freaking prostrate on the ground before games. and it messed with me. You know, I wouldn't have enough calories in, I wouldn't have enough rest and I'd play like, yeah, but at that time, I didn't have the tools to sustainably deal with it. If me of today was talking to me back then, I would have said, notice that this is an important moment for you. The nerves, the Just heightened level of physiological everything, like heart rate, everything. Oh man, I wanted to like puke. I wanted to disappear. What I know now is that I was having anxiety attacks in that. Like it was so intense. And the me of today would say, this is the thing that's important to you. Show up for yourself. Say hi to that strong emotional response and identify what's the next thing that helps you engage with this important moment. And the next thing for me would have been like drink water, eat food, get some rest, you know, find ways to like wind down to sleep before the game and then find ways to warm up to get my gear ready to be there with that experience going on. It was only years later that I realized, that I learned how to sit with that experience, and once I was able to sit with that experience, it turned into the most electric drive to just be the best. It was like a light switch once it finally worked. But it took a long time to stop fighting with myself and start sitting with that and taking that signal for the fact that, like, I really wanted to be the best on that day. And I'm sure a lot of people that are listening to this have gone through something like that. Stage fright, nerves, whatever it may be. Gastrointestinal upset before the race. That's why there's three pre-race poops. Right. Yeah. Okay. But when that stuff shows up, a big part of it is there's something important going on in that moment. And we can either run away and we can fight, we can avoid, or we can say, this is a signal that this is meaningful in this moment. Let's feel it, let's welcome it in, and let's do the next thing in, let's carry water, stack bricks. But first run to the port-a-potty. That's the moment you don't want to avoid. You would be surprised how much more stable your gut gets as soon as you make that flip to, like, I am excited for this opportunity. Well, I mean, you're talking about, like, you think people are going to, you know, relate to this experience. Like, based on the questions we have, like, everybody relates to this experience. Like, most of these are about, like, nerves. Like, how do I not sabotage myself when I'm nervous? Like, how do I have performance anxiety? you know, during longer efforts, um, you know, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. So, um, cause that's one of the things I was going to ask you, like in a general sense, like how do people deal with nerves? And I think, uh, and I think you actually touched on pretty much what I usually recommend to people. Not, not that I really have, uh, any professional training in this, but this is my experience is like one of my very first bike races, like my heart rate was like 170 plus on the start line. Like that's how hyped up I was. And I didn't recognize that. I'm never going to get any sleep the night before a race, ever. Still, to this day. If I have an event coming up, not that I race anymore, but the last one I did, I still didn't sleep, despite knowing that for a very long time I did this. Even martial arts tournaments when I was a teenager, same thing. And so I had to just focus on my routine and make it like a regular training day. Just make it as average as possible. And I actually went out of my way to go to more races, so that way it became... Just a blip in the radar, and I could just focus on my routine. Is that, is that? What you're describing, that last thing of go to more races to make a routine, is what we call habituation in the psychology world. Like, get used to it. That's one of the most effective interventions there is, is just do the thing so much that it's an everyday thing. But, it's not going to change the way we talk to ourselves about the big races. and so there's still another skill set around accepting the signal and showing up for yourself in that moment where it's important by saying like cool this is important to me and this is the next important step for me in this path to this opportunity and I'm going to like we have we have millions of years of evolution that have selected for our ability to identify threats and Fight or Flight. And a lot of what we experience that we would call nerves is some twisted iteration of there is a threat here and now. And it's really what it is, is a threat towards our valued directions. Right now, in this moment, we have an opportunity to move in a really big way towards a valued outcome. But that is brain-meltingly scary. Our fight or flight response is telling us, run, save yourself, run. Run from the start line. It's the easy decision. It's what we're talking about earlier. The easy decision is to avoid the big risk. For so many years, I actually dreaded going to races. I wanted to, but on the day, I was like, if I flat out of the first lap, I'm going to be really happy about it. And then it took me two or three years to get really excited and to be like, I am looking forward to this and like love being in the moment. Yeah. Yeah. And we as performance psychologists, we do a lot of work around helping people get into the moment, helping people recognize that signal for the important thing that it is and to distinguish between the part of the signal that is just the like. The Monkey Brain going, there's a lion somewhere, and we need to get out of here, versus the, like, we're in a new context, and this context is opportunity, and the only lion is a languaging about threat that we're doing. You know, the emotional response of, like, there's a huge opportunity right here, I don't want to screw it up, and so the easiest way not to screw it up is to just avoid. And so that, just like we were talking about with organizations and individuals in the off-season, spending time, getting clear on what's important, getting clear on the toward and away moves that are hard to do, coming up with metrics about how to do the toward the value to outcome kind of moves, and then making it easier to make that choice in the moment that is actually meaningful, we do the same thing. as far as working with individuals. We help them become present in the here and now. A lot of times when we're responding to threat or language about threat, we're thinking about there and then, the end of the race, when we walk through the door and we have to face our partner, when we show up for work the next day and we have to face our boss, we are somewhere other than here and now. And so one of the skills we do is help people be more present. Because that's the first step in, that's the first brick in the wall of being able to identify opportunities to approach what's important to us. So we're here now, we hold lightly to language, because language is real fuzzy like that, we've talked about it, and we accept that what's going to show up for us in any particular moment is mostly a historical echo. Okay? Whether it's a long historical echo of when we had to avoid the lion in the grass, or a near historical echo of somebody in our life telling us that the only people that matter are the people on the podiums. Okay? Whatever shows up is a reflection of our history. And so if we can accept that and say, okay, whatever shows up, it's a part of me. I'm not going to fight it. I'm just going to experience it and move. In a way that is meaningful to me, that can help us so that we can have the nerves and use them to our best committed action. I have one follow-up question on all of that, which is, how do you deal with the disappointment? Because cycling is full of chaos and luck, and very tangibly so, and a killer is going to win one out of ten races. You know, like, we wish we could get as good as baseball batting, you know, 300. Like, how awesome would that be when one in three races? Like, you know, maybe in a small local field somebody can do that, but like, you know, look at the sprinters. You know, same guy's not on the top step every single time, even though if you were going to put your money on Philipson or Weebus, you probably should, but it's... There's always luck. The odds are real close between those at the knife edge. And so there's always a matter of luck and chance. And if you run the race over and over and over again, you're never going to get the same winner every single time. And so where do these tools come in for, I think I should do well today, but I don't for some reason that's either related to just the chaos of the bike race or something out of your control like a flat or poorly timed mechanical, et cetera, et cetera. There's a couple different ones. One, clarity on values. Personal, meaningful values. If you're clear on what is meaningful to you as an individual, you can establish process goals. and those metrics along with the process goals that give you a very personal feedback loop on if you were moving in a meaningful direction regardless of the organization, the race, whatever outcome is out of your control. So clarity of values allows you to establish process goals and metrics so you can measure your own personal success. Building up skills of acceptance because as you said, There are so many things that are out of our control that being able to just sit with that as a part of the life experience can help us move forward and move in a meaningful direction and not get hooked by those things that are out of our experience. Building an individual's sense of identity that is independent of the specific roles that we play. Because we have identities around, you know, Patrick as the athlete, Patrick as the psychologist, Patrick as the professional. But a lot of times what shows up for people is when we have experiences that challenge those identities, we can feel a little bit untethered, like, who am I? And there are skills that we can, there are experiences that we can walk people through that show There's more than just those identities. We are a persistent experience that can't be destroyed or untethered. It's pretty rad, but it takes some time. And then the last one kind of goes back to the nerves question of like disappointment is a strong emotional response and learning to recognize the strong emotional response for the signal within the noise that there's something important there. Like, that makes it a much more sustainable experience. And it's going to sound strange, but as we move from this place of like control our emotions, fight our emotions, contain our emotions, to a place of like our emotions are valuable signals, then the specifics of the emotion, fear, anger, disappointment, frustration, happiness, That doesn't have such a dominant impact on us, as much as noticing the intensity and being like, oh, yes, I do want to move in that direction. I do want to engage in the challenging work to get better at that thing. Thank you, mind, body, whatever, for giving me this signal that there's something meaningful here. It really changes how we interact with that, and it allows us to put more effort towards doing the meaningful thing while experiencing the panoply of emotional responses. Through my graduate training and this whole, you know, training in philosophy and science, I care less about precision in many different contexts, and I care more about what produces the action that's made. Alright, thank you everybody for listening, if you'd like to get in touch with Patrick Smith, please visit the website and check out these show notes at empiricalcycling.com where I will have his contact information up, and if you'd like to reach out to me to talk about finding a performance psychologist, there are more in the world out there, and we know a couple good ones, and if you'd also like to reach out for coaching or consultations, please shoot me an email at empiricalcycling at gmail.com, you are, everybody who's reached out for coaching consultations, you're really the reason that This podcast keeps going, and thank you all for the continued support, but also the donations go a long way too, thank you for all of that, up here for cycling.com slash donate, and if you want to share the podcast, we love it when people share the podcast and just recommend word of mouth to friends, so thanks for all of that, and go give me a follow on Instagram if you want to ask a question in the weekend, or for our guests, and I guess that's it, we'll see you next time. 