Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Kolie Moore, joined as usual by Kyle Helson, and I want to thank everybody for listening and ask that you subscribe, although I assume most of you have, so at this point, the best thing you can do for the podcast is to share it with a friend, especially if you think what you're listening to is helpful. And if you also want to support the show, you can do so at empiricalcycling.com slash donate, because we are an ad-free podcast. please donate that would be great thank you so much and we've got the show notes up on the website we may or may not have some because we're kind of winging it today we'll see where we touch on in the show we've got some merch at empiricalcyclingpodcast.threadless.com and if you have any coaching and consultation inquiries questions or comments please email me at empiricalcycling at gmail.com and also on the Instagram weekend AMAs and the Instagram stories so give me a follow over there and participate in that or just watch and read that's cool too So we have another 10 Minute Tips episode. It's been a little bit, but I think this is going to be a good way to kind of touch on strength training because it is that time of year in the Northern Hemisphere and without doing like a big elongated series with, you know, nerdy mechanisms and whatnot. So Kyle and I have been strength training for a long time, Kyle a lot longer than me. And we're just going to kind of wing it. We're going to talk about why should you strength train. We're going to talk about how. And actually, I think that's probably going to cover probably a couple hours. So, Kyle, why do you strength train? Well, I would say within the realm of track sprint cycling, strength training occupies the same role almost as long, slow endurance rides do for endurance athletes. You look at the people who just won gold medals in Tokyo in track sprint cycling and they're all big people with, you know, big legs, big glutes. They're very strong in the gym if you watch them on Instagram, things like that. And it was known, obviously you go back to the 90s, you even look at pictures of like Marty Nothstein and those guys, they were big, but they were seemingly somehow maybe not even as big, certainly not as big, probably not putting up the same like raw max weights as the people are today. And I think over the last 10 years, especially in track sprint cycling, people have realized that, yeah, you want to go fast, you got to lift heavy weights often, way more often than if you were a crit racer or even an endurance track rider. Well, I think these days also with the gear size getting bigger, it used to be more about the rate of force development, like how fast can you turn on your muscles? How fast could you actually use all that strength? And you would be flying 200s going down the back straight at like, what, 160 RPM or something like that? Yeah, yeah. You watch the videos and they're going, I mean, they're still going fast. They're going low tens. maybe high nines at altitude or in Moscow on like 98-inch gears or 96-inch gears like just spinning their brains out trying to not slow down. You know, like 52-14 was like a big gear or something. Now 52-14 isn't even a big gear for endurance riders. Yeah. Yeah. Somebody said in the last Olympic quad in Rio that like 110 inches was too small. for the Omnium, like in the points race. Although I think actually one of the big differences between track sprinters of old and track sprinters of new, and sorry for this deviation, folks, but this is kind of relevant. I think they had a lot more upper body muscle than sprinters do now. Like sprinters now, I think they see the upper body stuff as more for function and to keep you from launching yourself off your bike if you don't have any grip strength or shoulder strength. If you can single leg press, I don't know, 400 kilos or something ridiculous. You can't row like 100 pounds, right? You can't actually stabilize your body. If you put Chris Froome's upper body on Jeffrey Hoogland's legs or something. Yeah, that would be ridiculous. And so I think that actually gets to one of the first reasons to do strength training is for function. Like I think a lot of people notice when they do some strength training, their on-bike comfort gets better, especially in the upper body and maybe lower back sometimes. But, you know, low back is kind of a tricky one. But like shoulders, neck, that kind of stuff. Like I noticed when I – because I am – You know, busy and my life's been upended like nine times in the last couple of years. So I've been like on and off strength training quite a bit. And every time I start back again, then I'm riding, I notice I'm a lot more comfortable on the bike and I can be comfortable for longer. So I think that's one of the nice benefits of it. And one of the other nice benefits is... that just impact loading or just like loading of the bones in general because that makes them more dense. And you see people like Josepo Baloki from that crash in the mid-aughts or something. He fell and he broke his femur. And I think, I can't obviously say for sure, but I think if he had done some strength training and he didn't have hollow, brittle bird bones, he may not have had a career ending crash that day. Yeah, I think the other thing too is one of the benefits of strength training is that you are putting yourself in more extreme ranges of motion and applying a load and having to produce force in that position, which means that you get stronger across a broad range of motion, which will make sitting in some... Mild and uncomfortable bike position a little bit easier. Yeah. Well, that's the question of specificity, isn't it, though? Because a lot of people would look at the range of motion on a bike, especially for the legs, and they would go, oh, that's not that big. Like, why do we need to squat deep? Well, we can kind of get into the mechanism of that another time deeply, but I think the short answer is, well, because what you're talking about here is mobility, right? It's flexibility plus strength in those extreme ranges of motion is mobility, I think. It's a good trend, a trendy word these days, mobility. Oh, I'm working on my mobility. It's not just flexibility, it's mobility. Yeah, because flexibility is more like what position can you put yourself in passively if you're like not flexing your muscles and you can just push your whatever arm or leg into whatever position or torso. And, you know, there's, you know, you don't need to be the most mobile or flexible person in the world to have a good, you know, time on the bike, really. Although I think, you know, a lot of people have like hamstring problems on the bike, especially like extending their legs while they're bent over. And that's actually something strength training can address as well, right? I've got a spiel ready for it, but... Why don't you take a crack at it first? Because I think you're going to be on the same page as me. What benefits does strength training have for mobility? Well, I think if you just sit down and stretch, sure, you can put yourself into those positions and passively stretch your way to be able to do the splits or something like that. But that is somewhat different than having to apply a load. and then move into that position. Not to mention, if you're sort of ignoring your hamstrings, in most trainings, riding a bike doesn't really use that much hamstring. When you actually do do exercises for hamstrings, part of the eccentric movement stretches your hamstring. So you are actually, you know, hopefully being able to expand kind of the range of motion you can get out of your hamstrings, which should help you. in your other athletic pursuits where your hamstrings might be tight because when you train them, you're actually inducing some stretch. Not just passively sitting in a desk chair all day with your hamstrings just kind of tight or something. Well, they're actually shortened because, you know, your knees are bent. And so that would put them in a shorter position. So when you stand and then you've got to try to touch your toes, if you can barely get your hands past your knees, I would expect you to have a bad time trying to get really, really low on a bike due to your hamstring. you know flexibility or mobility and so like what would you want to do to address that single leg straight leg deadlift that's a very functional exercise incorporates a lot of the body and balance as well if you hinge at the hip keep your knees very slightly bent and you know you can do a set of 10 or 15 and also record yourself when you do strength training watching yourself do a movement from the third person is much different than actually just watching yourself in a mirror or just not even seeing yourself at all. And you can pick up on a lot of your own movement patterns where you can see it and go, oh, I'm screwing this up. I got to try this again, which is why if you're in the gym and you see people recording themselves, it's probably only partly for vanity and the rest of it is for function of, you know, I need to see myself do this so I can fix my problems. So the other one for hamstrings, I would say is good mornings. And this is one that actually is really easy to overload. Like, I'm fairly strong, and I still am only doing good mornings with like 135. Yeah, totally. I've been doing them with somewhere between 135 and 185, depending on how many reps. And it's like, you can, you think it's like, oh, especially if you're someone who's squatting over 300 pounds regularly, like, oh, this is... My hamstring should be strong. Like I can do this. And, you know, it's a little humbling, but it's the lower back sometimes ends up being a limiter there, too. So, yeah. And then the next day you're going to go, oh, my God, my hamstrings are so sore. And that's wise, because when you get into these extreme, quote unquote, extreme that, you know, for a cyclist doing a good morning to. whatever range of motion you can is pretty extreme because you don't really use those like center hamstring muscles on the bike like you said. And so when you get there, it's actually inducing a stretch. And especially if you pause at the end range of motion for a second or two, I find personally that this really helps my range of motion. Like when I was trying to get my squat deeper and I'm doing okay now, I used to have a... You've seen it. I just have a horrible squat range of motion. I was like two or three inches above parallel. It was like the deepest I could go. And anyway, if you aren't familiar with some of these exercises, especially I know that the good morning is maybe scary for some people because people were always told like, oh, don't lift with your back, blah, blah, blah. Well, your back should be in the same position for the whole range. YouTube. I'm going to do a third-party plug here, but Mike Isretel puts up some pretty good strength training movement, big top 10 mistakes type videos. They're pretty good. And so for some of these exercises, if you feel like you have no idea or you have a video and you're looking at it of yourself and you go, I'm doing something wrong, but I can't really tell, look up Mike Isretel's videos. Yeah. So why don't we get into, let's see. Okay, so we're kind of covering it from a functional perspective at the moment, but also we kind of touched on strength. So like, why would you want to do this? Partly because just general health and bone density. I think especially for athletes who are getting into their mid to late 40s and early 50s, this is something that you really, really want to do because this is like... Have you heard of like, this is a gendered term, apologies, but have you heard of old man strength or old person strength, I guess we could say? Yeah, yeah, right. Yeah, it's where somebody's got great endurance and they're just losing their sprint. Like Tom Bonin in the last couple of years of his career, he wasn't as good a sprinter as when he was young. So anyway, so those large motor units, if you don't use them, you lose them. And so you can actually, well, also the rate of force development, the neural... Component of this starts to decline as we get older. So we can actually train those a little bit. You know, you're not going to stop father time. Father time? Yeah, guys are assholes, so is time. You're not going to stop father time from coming and taking those things from you, but you can certainly help yourself along by doing some strength training as you get older. Yeah. I also think that as everyone ages, what muscle mass you have tends to fade. But if you are lifting even a little bit, you know, you can try to stave some of that off as well. In addition to things like diet, but like if you're just, you know, sitting on the couch and eating donuts and stuff, you know, even if you're riding a ton, like, yeah, as you age. More and more, you'll lose more and more muscle mass just naturally. Yeah. And you'll keep what you use for sure. Like I'm sure a lot of people have seen, you know, cross sections of leg muscle mass and fat mass in older adults and people who are, you know, lifelong triathletes or runners or cyclists have a lot more leg muscle and a lot less fat than people who are completely sedentary where it's like, it might be the same size quad, but You're going to see an inch of fat on the outside, and it's like, ugh. I mean, I know at that point you're old, but it's not great to be losing muscle mass like that. You don't want to die sitting on the toilet. No. I can't get up from the toilet. Here lies. Here sits Elvis Presley. Yeah. That brings up something that I do want to do a deeper dive onto one of these days is there's a study that looked at, well, because for a long time, VO2 max in old age was one of the best predictors of longevity. But even better than VO2 max, if memory serves, is leg strength. because if you can get up from the toilet, if you can get up from your chair, if you can walk up and down stairs, you will move more and you can, you know, you'll just like, you'll go, oh, I need to like get up and get a drink of water instead of sitting there and going, oh, it's so much effort to get up. I'm not going to have some water or I'm not going to take a piss or I'm just going to sit here on the toilet for two hours. Yeah. Or whatever it is. Yeah. And obviously if you're able to do those things, the odds that you are able to get even a little bit of exercise in, be that walking every day or something like that, even if it's 10-15 minutes, that helps a lot, especially as you age. Yeah, like I knew an older guy, well he's still alive so I know him, who could, he couldn't really get up out of a chair. Or, you know, if he was like outside gardening, he would like bend down to like pick up some weeds and then he couldn't get back up. Like, you know, that's the kind of thing where you could easily see, oh God, yes. So strength is really, really important. So, okay. So you actually mentioned this briefly is diet. So what about diet? Cause I think maybe a lot of people, I think most people are not under this impression, but some people may be. Cause I, I don't know. Do you? Is it just me, or do you see a lot of cyclists who are confused or don't have good information on supplements and protein and things like that? Yeah, I think, well, especially if you're competing in an organization where you have a high probability of getting, or a small even, but some non-zero probability of having to pass a drug test. Some people for supplements are like, I just don't want to have to deal with it. It's probably good. There's probably some stuff I could do. I just don't want the headache, you know, of worrying about that kind of stuff. And I totally understand that. Yeah. No, yeah. I think there's tons of people think like, oh, like I'm doing an endurance sport. And what we're taught from a young age in endurance sports is carbs, carbo-loading, carbs, carbs, carbs, you know. Yeah, but, oh, I'm doing strength training now, so I need some protein, right? So, like, the most common one I get is, should I supplement with branched-chain amino acids? And the answer is no. Because, well, like, okay, so here's the thing. It's like, you can supplement, or you can supplement, you can just have protein. Like, a protein supplement is just, you know, if you... are having food. Like if I have a can of tuna, that's not enough protein for me personally for one serving. So I'll like, I'll dip into the whey protein. But if I could, if I could stand to have two cans of tuna, that would be even better. Although, you know, it's neither here nor there. But anyway, so when it comes to like protein, does just having protein help you gain muscle mass? The answer is no. You need a stimulus first, obviously. It's sort of like if you... have a lot of B vitamins, which are used in metabolism. Are you going to improve your VO2 max? The answer is obviously no. It's the same thing. You need a stimulus first, then you need the ingredients to make the thing. So you need lots of protein to make the muscles with a stimulus. But branched-chain amino acids are leucine, isoleucine, and valine. And these are actually very highly available in things like whey protein and yogurt. Yeah. And I think the other thing generally too is you kind of hit on this with the can of tuna, but it's probably going to be cheaper and more cost effective and probably taste better if you just eat food. First order is like eat food, right? Like food is cheap, relatively speaking, compared to supplements. And supplements should be an add-on, like a way to ensure that you don't have any deficiencies. They shouldn't be like a staple of your diet. There is no reason that you should only get your protein sources from whey shakes while you're working out or something like that. Yeah. Yeah, I think actually, well, at some point I'm going to have a real nutritionist on to talk about this kind of thing. So for now, just let's put this on the back burner for a bit. Let's get into just general strength training. So how would you want to start? Like if you're nervous about going to the gym, what do you do? Well, ideally you would find a coach or someone you trust who could go with you to help you learn movements correctly and not totally injure yourself and also present realistic weight targets and things like that. But hypothetically, if you cannot do that, there are tons of resources online to at least see videos of exercises being correctly performed. And you, like we said earlier, can video yourself initially with no weight or with just an empty bar or with a light dumbbell or something like that, trying to do some of these exercises. And honestly, if you're embarrassed because you're new, everyone started off somewhere. Everyone was new at some point. There's plenty of people who hop on a bike for the first time and you see them riding around the park and you're all kitted out and doing your intervals. But when you ride past them, you don't think, aha, that person sucks. And it's the same thing at the gym. No one is thinking, oh, haha, look at that noob. Aren't they such a weakling? Yeah. Well, if they're looking at you, you might be doing something wrong and they're like... waiting for something to pop while you're doing your movement out of concern. So a lot of the time... And you end up on a meme page. Yeah, exactly. Yeah, you'll end up on, what is it, gym fails or something like that. Yeah, got horrifying stuff in there. Yeah, you don't want to be there. So yeah, having a trainer or somebody experience you trust is great. But I think also if you're new... Honestly, don't be afraid to go up to somebody kind of friendly looking in the gym who you see doing the things that you want to do. If somebody's got a good squat, you can be like, hey, sorry to bother you. Between sets, would you mind helping me look at my squat and giving me a couple pointers? I'm sure they would be extremely happy to. People have done that with me in the gym, and I'm always really, really happy to go help. Yeah, and I think sometimes it's a little scary to you because people will be sitting there with their headphones in and looking really serious, being like, uh, uh, or they're like breathing really heavy, like, uh, uh, working really hard, uh, uh. But like, yeah, if you go to the gym, most of your time is spent sitting around. Some very small fraction is actually spent actually lifting weights. That's very true. I think previously before everyone had headphones and things like that, it was probably much more social. but now especially because everyone's got their headphones and they want to listen to whatever music they want to listen to or weirdos will listen to like murder mystery documentaries or something while they're lifting. Yeah, I think it can seem much more antisocial. We'll also have to... person in charge of the music at your gym doesn't have music that you like as their choice, then yeah, you're going to want to go with headphones. It gets really weird to listen to Kelly Clarkson for the fourth time in the middle of a squat set when you're like, man, I wish I could listen to my sugar right now. But yeah, I think that's a good point. The other thing is if you are working with a coach and if this coach feels comfortable with reviewing lifting videos in addition to your incessant training peaks comments. Perhaps you could ask them to also be an extra set of eyes if you can successfully take a video of yourself. Well, yeah, that's how I do it. I'll be like, well, people I know who are really new, I'll suggest strongly, please find a trainer to help you learn these certain techniques. And then we won't do everything for every session. But it's like you learn front squats, but... I may not add front squats to every single training session, you know, or like deadlifts, but not everything is about deadlifts, et cetera, et cetera. So just making sure you've got those movement patterns in and they're looked after and making sure that you're not breaking down with technique. Cause I'll ask a lot of my athletes like record your last set for me. Cause that's when you're tired and when your technique's the most likely to break down. and if I know that the person's working at sub max weights and you know they've got the safety arms and everything like I can see their technique and give them pointers when an actual in-person lifting coach may not be available especially with COVID these days that may also be an additional challenge to get somebody there to help you with technique and also Kyle you've seen trainers do this in the gym and so have I but I think a lot of the time actually they over cue people. Like a lifting cue being like chest up or knees out or whatever it is. If you give somebody a laundry list of like 50 things to work on every single rep, they're not going to remember any of it. Oh, totally, yeah. Every day you got to pick one and we're going to do work on that one thing. Between every set, you pick something that set and you're going to focus on that set. Yeah, exactly. it's akin to learning any other skill like juggling where if you try to remember if you try to go from 0 to 100 where 100 is riding a unicycle while juggling well and you can't do either well you're going to probably do pretty poorly and it's going to take you a very long time if you every time just try to hop on a unicycle and immediately start juggling as opposed to say first learning how to unicycle or first learning basic juggling drills and then putting it all together. Yeah and I think the The main point here that we can sum up is if you don't lift something well, you didn't lift it at all. Like every once in a while, like I'll see my squat depth in the mirror and I'll be like, oh my God, that last rep, I did not hit depth. And the question is... Can I hit depth on the next rep? Or if I actually hit good depth on the next rep, am I going to miss it? And if I think I'm going to miss it, I'm not going to keep squatting. I'm done for the day for squats. That's it. I'm too tired to actually do things in the range of motion that's going to help, at the low that's going to help. Otherwise, if you're getting really tired, especially in your core or your shoulders, You may have compensation patterns that can put you at higher risk of injury, like for back rounds or whatever. This is scary stuff to think about, right? Yeah, definitely. I think the other thing is people think that a total failure in a gym has to be like you hit the bottom of a squat and you start to stand up and you can't, so you dump it. And that's what failure looks like. Like you said, failure should actually be like, did you fail to complete the lift with good technique and with a like standardized range of motion. Like if you keep getting less and less steep on your squats, you're doing less and less work and those reps aren't the same as the ones in the beginning when you were hitting good depth. Yeah. Yeah. So actually, while you're touching on depth, let's talk about depth right now briefly because I think a lot of people may be confused by people like Joel Manseed. What's his name? Joel Seidman, that's it. With his like weird 90 degree eccentric isometric, I'm sorry, I've, I've, I followed him for a little bit, it was too much, I had to unfollow that guy's Instagram. But yeah, he's, you know, people like that, people with, oh yeah, this is the actual way to do whatever, you know, there's no, there's no secrets, especially with strength training at this point. If you're, so anyway, so with range of motion, you want to get into as much range of motion as you can. And if you can, if you need to lower the weights to, you know, do the range of motion, because I can quarter squat a lot of weight, like to the point where my knees are like, sorry, you want us to do what? I remember a couple of years ago, I was like, I was just trying quarter squats just to see. if they had any immediate effect. And the answer is they had an immediate effect on the soreness of my knees. That was it. Nothing else. I was quarter squatting like 500 pounds when I was like full depth squatting like 300 something and it was too much load. Yeah, I think the other thing is that your squat, like you said before, your squat depth, what it is now, does not have to be the squat depth that you are stuck with for life. And so if it takes you a couple of years, that's fine. But if you can get to a depth that you like or improve your depth in some way year to year, that's great. You know, that is fine. There's nothing wrong with it. You don't have to just go out immediately and be able to squat so deep that your hamstrings smash into your calves from day one. It is a good feeling when you finally get to that point, though. And I think the other thing, too, is that comes up with some of the videos, the trendy videos, maybe from Joel and... Seidman and others is that he wants everyone to squat in the exact same way, have this 90-90-90 position or whatever. And if you go out and look at the way people who do a squat for their sport, so powerlifting and then even like Olympic weightlifting, not all of them squat the same and that's fine. Not all of them have to squat the same and all of them realize that there's going to be some you can actually see that if you sit on your you know linoleum or wood floor in socks and you have a little bit of slipperiness underneath your feet and work yourself down to the bottom of a squat you can move your feet around and play with your stance width a little bit or something like that and figure out where that squat stance feels good for you as opposed to just being like oh I have to do shoulder width apart feet like forward or slightly turned out and I have to go down to this depth and blah blah blah Yeah, it takes a little getting used to. Actually, it takes a lot of getting used to. I've been squatting for years, and I'm still going like, oh, if I adjust this a little bit this way, if I work on this. I'm still working on it, despite that I've done probably thousands of squats now. And I think a good resource for this is actually Squat University. I have on my desk, because I use it all the time, the... Well, where is it now? I can't find it. It's the like squat university. Oh, it's over there on the floor. It's a squat university, like what a squat handbook or something like that. It's a great resource. And actually just online, if you just Google squat university and the thing you want to think about, like look at like squat stance or squat depth or whatever it is, like ankle mobility or, you know, core bracing, like there's something on it that Aaron Horschig has. put out, and his stuff is great, honestly. It is. So check out Squat University as a resource. But anyway, with depth, actually, I think one of the... So before we tackle the mechanism in a future strength series on training that we're going to get to maybe next after the metabolism series? We'll see. When it comes to the stimulus, so I'm sure somebody out there, actually probably a lot of people out there are wondering, if I can go deeper with less weight, is that as good a stimulus as not going as deep with a lot of weight? And the answer is actually that it's approximately the same stimulus as best as we can tell. So if you go full depth... With less weight, that is just as good as going not as deep with more weight because the stretch on the muscle and the tension is sensed by blah, blah, blah. We'll get into it later. And if you can do that more, it makes more or it makes approximately the same mechanical stimulus. So if you can achieve the same stimulus with lighter weights. that's less injury risk. And I'm all about that as somebody who is potentially liable for other people's injuries. I think that's really good. Oh, totally. Like there's, there's something to be said for being somewhat smart about this. Like there's great videos I'm sure out there of people, I don't know, being able to quarter squat tons of weight or, you know, 10. 10 centimeters of range of motion on some leg press with like 1,000 and 500 pounds. Yeah, and you're like, well, that's just risky. Like, why take more risks? Like, bike racing is fairly risky. Like, rarely in other sports do you have the risk of crashing into the pavement or something. So if you can minimize risks in other parts of your life, it's probably a good idea. To keep in mind is that your sport is bikes. Your sport is not like cool lifting vids of how much weight you can lift. So who cares? Like at the end of the day, who cares? Like it's fun to brag to your friends, oh, I squatted, you know, 200 kilos or whatever. But ultimately, that's not what matters. Yeah, and I think that's one of the things to address when people start getting into the gym, when they think about how much should I get into the gym and how hard can I or should I go? And the answer is everybody's favorite. It depends. So what does it depend on? So if it's interrupting cycling as your main thing, like let's say you're like in the middle of a race season and you go. Oh my God, I need to weight train to improve my sprint or whatever. Then you get into the gym and you go to the gym two or three times a week and now all of your intervals are suffering and you are not racing as well, blah, blah, blah. That's not a good thing. It's sort of like, you know, if you look at like soccer players or football players, American football, sorry, or lacrosse players or whoever. The weight training is a supplement to aid your sport. You're not doing the weight training to become a good weight lifter. I also think that it should be – there are ways – like the big thing people think about is soreness and there are ways to mitigate soreness and one of those is not diving straight into – not lifting into like full-on three-hour gym sessions where you just grind out rep after rep after rep. So allowing yourself. Yeah, and in the tips spirit of 10-minute tips, let's give people tip on how much and how often. So I would say start with once to twice a week with very light weights. If you're new to this or even if you're just getting into it again after, you know, a whole bike racing season off of the weights, twice a week is good. and starting with light weights until kind of the soreness starts to go away. You're starting to feel the movement patterns sink in again and you're starting to feel strong in your squat or whatever else you're doing. And then the soreness goes away. Then you can... Pretty easily go, okay, all right, it's time to start increasing the weights. But it might take two or three times into the gym before that starts to go away, and you might still get sore. But after a while, you are no longer going to be sore. And I think the other thing to think about with soreness is, first of all, you're not going to be sore forever. Like, I don't get sore anymore, unless I do hamstring stuff, because my hamstrings are barely trained. Soreness does not necessarily overlap with fatigue. So one of the things I suggest to people who are very sore is to... Do what you can to move around. Like if you're going to be completely sedentary, especially after a lifting stimulus, your muscles are probably going to want to stiffen up quite a bit because lifting does stiffen connective tissue in the muscle and will loosen it at the tendon, stuff like that. So when you are between lifting and you're sore, it's really good to move around and just be like, all right, can I... Introduce some motion into myself like do a little gentle stretching you can go for a walk or a very gentle hike or something like that I think would be really good for most people even 10-20 minutes on the rollers if that's something that you like yeah that's fine and honestly it probably seems like one of those things you're like oh is that really gonna make a difference but if you have ever experienced this. It definitely does. You think like, oh, what is 10, 15, 20 minutes going to do? And you start off feeling terrible. And by the end, you're like, oh, this actually does feel okay. Great. I don't feel like I cannot find the toilet seat anymore. Yeah. Although that, you know, there is a particular glory in the first couple training sessions soreness after. a couple weeks off because it's like, oh man, I feel like I'm working again. Oh, this is great. I feel like I'm getting back into it. And then I think a lot of people will end up trying to chase that feeling of soreness and accomplishment when, like, especially when you get into lifting heavy, like Kyle and I do. I think, Kyle, you sent me somebody on Instagram saying this recently. It's like, especially once you get into the really heavy stuff and the short... reps range, like one to five reps. It's not that you're sore and it's not that you're really muscularly tired, although you certainly are. It's more like your nervous system is going, what the fuck? Yeah, totally. And if you ever have tried to do a one rep max, and then, you know, gotten a number and then on the next, you know, bump it up a little bit and then you fail. It's definitely not that your muscles are like, I can't do this. It's that you're telling your body like, you know, fire harder, fire harder, fire harder, and you can't. And then you're just like, well, guess I can't. Yeah. Which is actually why I never have given anybody but you a one rep max on the squat. Because you're experienced enough to know how to do that. But a lot of cyclists, you don't need to figure out how far am I going? You know, what's my max? Like you can actually gauge this pretty easily by RPE. And so I usually describe RPE like this. It's like, you know, the 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 range. Like 10 is like... I have absolutely nothing left. I am empty. I am dead. Whether it's one rep or 20, it's like, this is the last one I got. The next one is definite failure. Nine is like, I think I have one more in me and it's going to be a stretch, maybe two. It's not like, because I think there's a lot of like... 10 minus whatever reps in reserve. How many can you do at the end of your set? I think a lot of people equate that as RPE, but I think that kind of leaves it open for interpretation because I think, Kyle, you and I, we'd seen some research a while ago that suggested that endurance athletes, you know, like the one rep max table to like down to like, you know, what's your five rep max and like three rep max and six rep max and you know those tables, right? Yeah. that endurance athletes, those tables are all screwed up. Yeah, definitely. Yeah, and so because your muscles are really good at the recovery aspect that the, you know, if you're, you can do like, let's say, you know, 90% of your one rep max, like, let's say it's like, what, usually three to four or something like that is the estimate. Yeah. Endurance athletes would be able to do like five, six, seven, maybe. And I've certainly seen. Endurance athletes do their one rep max twice. And if we put five more pounds, they cannot do it. And like, it's crazy to watch. It's like, you can do your max load twice in a row, but like, if we add two and a half pounds or five pounds onto this like 250 pound weight, we go 255, it cannot be done. And then we take the weight off and suddenly you can do two again. It's the weirdest thing I've ever seen. And a lot of those tables and all that data, a lot of it came from Soviet sports schools designed around Olympic weightlifting. So they are really taking that data from people doing Olympic weightlifting or, you know, shot putters, people who are really, really, really pure fast twitchers, high load, high force type athletes and not cyclists. Low endurance. Yeah. So that is one reason why it's just that that pool of data did not include very many or any maybe like crit racers or something. Yeah. All right. Well, so let's think about load progression. Like when you start out lifting, obviously just the bar. Like last time I got back into the gym after taking a couple months off, my old one rep max for squats had been about 400 pounds. I got back into the gym, and I had trouble. I did 225 for one my first day back, and I was like, okay, I'm done. It felt like my muscles were going to rip right off my bones. And I was like, that's it. I'm good. I'm just going to do really light weights now. I got to the point where, for the record, you should not get to your first time back, but I'm stupid. So I had more ego than I had strength. Perfect. Yeah, exactly. Now it's been a couple months and I'm like repping into the 300 skin. So it can come back, but you want to start light. But the other thing that we have is the Golgi tendon organ. And so what this does, it detects stretch on the tendons and in the connective tissue to say, if the load is too much, we're actually going to cut off the tension of the muscles entirely because they're about to... get pulled off the bone or we're about to like rip a tendon or something like that and tendons and ligaments don't have a blood supply so they're really really hard and takes a long time to repair so that's something you really don't want to do so when you feel that if you feel that in the gym you want to back it off like several notches before you hurt yourself is the point. I think the other thing is just like if you were going to dive back into FTP work from not having done it for a year. You wouldn't dive back into what was my FTP a year ago, like peak fitness. I'm just going to try to do some intervals at that level and see how far I get. Very not far. Yeah, so as people progress the load when they get into the gym, like for the first, I would say like four to even like six or eight sessions. You kind of want to do a little higher reps, a little lower load to not only get in the, just embed in the movement patterns a little better, but also I think higher reps does good things for us in terms of, you know, I've never been able to find research on this. I'm sure people are looking at it now, but I think neurally in terms of the fatigue resistance of your nervous system and the neuromuscular junctions in your muscles. I think, pure speculation here, but I think it actually has a big benefit there, which is one of the reasons that the traditional periodization schemes for strength training, same as with for endurance training, have a lot of merit. And then for people who aren't aware, the traditional periodization for strength training often starts with... Hipertrophy phase where you're doing lower weights, more reps, like 8, 12, sets of 8, 12, 15 type thing. Yeah, after you've adapted to getting into the gym and all that again. The adaptation phase, then hypertrophy phase. Oh, no, but yeah, I'm just saying that, yeah, a lot of traditionally, you know, if you have ever lifted weights for team sports or something like that in high school, a lot of those programs, high school football coaches just cut and paste something else that they got and a lot of it follows that. Very traditional flow. Yeah. And then I would also say, don't do your movements too fast. This is one of the mistakes I think a lot of people make when they get into it because the weights are light. And so it's like, oh man, I can really toss this bar around. Yes, but also don't. When you do things too quickly, you're not thinking about the movement patterns in each spot. For instance, this is why if you watch a lot of weightlifters on Instagram like Kyle and I do, one of the things that they do, because weightlifting, it's one movement. It's one thing. You're not going out there and it's like, who's got the best three rep max clean, which I don't know. That sounds like a CrossFit thing. I would guess. I'll take your word for it. But the point is like this one movement. And so if you go out and you're not familiar with each little point in that movement about how your body should move around the bar, you're leaving performance on the table. And so a lot of the time with weightlifting, you see people pausing at certain points, like you'll start... The clean from the hang. You'll start above the knee. You'll start it below the knee. You'll start it right by your feet, an inch off the ground, you know, that kind of stuff. And people will pause at certain points. And it's kind of fascinating to watch that kind of stuff because you're training your movement patterns. And if you go slowly or you stop at certain points, you really get that movement pattern in better. Like when I'm warming up my squats, I just put the bar on my shoulders. and I go down a quarter of the way, I come back up. I go down a little further, I come back up. So not only am I loosening up my muscles, but I'm also remembering the movement pattern as I'm warming up. And by the time I get to my working sets, I'm like, oh yeah, I can nail this, no problem. But if I just went either right to heavy weights or if I went right to moving really, really fast, I wouldn't have that time to consider my body and those certain points in the movement while I'm warming up. You know what I mean? Yeah, and that makes a lot of sense too. I think this gets into something else that people often ask is, what do I do for warm-ups? Do I just dive into max working weight? No, just like you wouldn't dive into max VO2 workouts or something. Well, I'm sure some people do. We'll talk about warm-ups one of these days. Well, Kyle, what's your normal routine before you lift? Because you're in the gym two or three times a week like me, so what do you do? For a typical squat day, I usually ride my bike to the gym. And if I don't ride my bike to the gym, I'll hop on a spin bike or something like that for five, ten minutes, whatever, just start to feel good. I do some... Hold on. At what intensity? Because for me, I would do that at like 50 watts, maybe. Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah. It's like just enough to start to feel like you're warm, but not like a, you know... Crit Warm-Up or something where you've got to ramp it up to FTP and then shut it down and then do some hard sprints. No, no, no. This is five, ten minutes of zone one. Yeah, zone 0.25. I would actually say for the nerds out there, the point is you don't want to activate AMPK. Yeah, this is just to feel good. Maybe you're sad all day, right? Yeah, just to loosen up. Have teams meetings all day, so I sit a lot. And then I'll usually do some banded glute walks, like you put a band around your knees and you do shuffles to the side, or you do maybe monster walks or things like that. These are exercises you can look up online if you're not familiar with them. And then I will grab a bar, grab an empty bar, and first I will... put it on my back like I was going to do a squat but not actually do anything and just kind of stretch out my shoulders and my back so that it feels comfortable and I'm not just putting a bunch of weight on there without having made sure my shoulders feel okay, upper back feels okay. I'll sit down in a squat position for a little bit with the empty bar just to, again, like you said, kind of feel out those positions. And then, yeah, I start off with like 10 reps. Empty bar, completely empty bar every time. And then I usually do 8 at 135, 6 at 225, 4 at 315, and then a couple at whatever the working weight is going to be. Or if you then switch to front squats or single leg squats or whatever the working squat type movement is going to be. Yeah, I do pretty much the same. I usually don't do any aerobic warm-up. I usually do sets of like 10-ish for like the bar and 135, and that actually warms me up. pretty well aerobically. So that's my personal strategy. Yes, because my muscles are like, oh yeah, we're just used to relaxing. And then you do 10 squats and they're like, oh my God, this is getting pretty aerobic, man. And I'm like, yeah, I know, you'll get used to it. So I actually spend some time huffing and puffing between the first couple of working sets. But by the time I get up into my working ranges, I'm like... Like it, it'll only take it out of me in terms of like blood pressure regulation. Like when you take the belt off and then you feel yourself get dizzy or you like, you finish your last squat, you rack it and then you can relax and you go, Oh my God, everything's going gray. Um, especially for the higher rep ranges, like eight, 10, 12. Like that's, that's like, that's like going out for a five hour ride for somebody like me. Yeah. I think the other thing is you kind of gloss over this, but Typically for resting in between sets, I'll rest however long it takes for me to feel like I want to go again. So typically that's going to be more than a minute. And for really, really hard, heavy sets, that may be more than five minutes, but it's never like I have a clock and I'm like, oh man, I can only rest 90 seconds or something. No, no, no. The point is not to be fatigued going into the next set. The point is to feel good, like you want to do this again. Yeah, exactly. And I actually do time myself between working sets, but just as a curiosity. I'm not like, oh, it's been five minutes, I've got to do another one. If it's been five minutes and I feel good, I'll do another one. But most of the time, it'll be like seven minutes, nine minutes, especially if I'm like... I know, I have for real rested up to like 15 minutes between heavy reps, between heavy sets. And that's not good or bad. It's just what it is. So once you've done a couple... Couple Heavy Days, and you're kind of, you know, getting used to putting on a little more weight at about the same RPE and about the same rep range, like maybe like 8 to 12 for a couple weeks. Then you take a deload week. You're going to rest. And so let's go over a kind of deload strategy. Like, what would you say? Like, for lighter weights, you could probably do the same sets and reps, but with like, what? Half the reps, maybe a third of the reps as opposed to like a full working set. Like if you're doing 10, you might at like 135 pounds, you might do like a set of like three to five, like two or three sets. And that's going to be a good deload day, right? Yeah. And I think of this kind of like how you would think of a good opener day where in an opener day, you're going to do some higher, harder work, but just long enough to feel good and not. so much that you feel tired at the end. And so for a deload day, you want to work to the point where you're like, oh yeah, this feels good. I think I feel like I could keep going, but I'm going to stop. Yeah. And I think once you get into the higher weights, like into the upper 100 pounds, like lower 200 pounds, maybe, yeah, somewhere around there, you kind of want to back the load off too, because your joints actually can take quite a beating. I did about three weeks of heavier squats and, you know, blah, blah, blah. And by the last day, which was Friday for me or Thursday, I was doing these squats and I'm like, oh my God, my knees could use a break right now. Like they weren't in danger of being injured, but I could tell that the load on them was like a little, oh God. For my rest week coming up, my max weight on the bar is going to be like 185. And that'll just be like plenty for me, a couple sets of five. I'm still going to be tired, but I'm going to like get the movement pattern in. I'm going to keep myself moving, and I'm going to work on my range of motion while I'm doing this. But, you know, it's not going to be like I get in there and I smash it, then I leave. You know, you want to give your muscles and your joints and your connective tissue a rest as well. Yeah, and like you said earlier, connective tissue gets less blood flow than your muscles. So this is one thing you have to consider when you're lifting weights is that it's not – they don't have the same recovery speeds. Yeah, and I think we actually – If you could somehow inject blood into your – that's great. Well, I mean – well, for like cartilage and stuff, squeezing it, like going for a walk or something, this is how we get nutrient exchange into those cells. But for, you know, muscles actually have, like, they are tightly regulated in terms of blood flow anyway, just because oxygen is toxic. I think we did a podcast on this once where my hypothesis was a recovery ride is really good a lot of the time because you can actually exchange a lot more oxygen and nutrients and, you know, get a little more repair going. That was the speculation anyway. I still have no idea if that's correct or not. Actually, we could probably do a 10-minute tips episode just on what exercises, like exercise selection. Oh, for sure. I think the other thing to think about is you don't have to spend bodybuilder style getting hundreds of working reps as well. This does not have to be a four-hour gym session. This can be an hour, hour and a half. You get in, you do your work, and you can leave. You don't have to... take up residence there in front of the squat rack. Yeah. And bodybuilder stuff is very different than what we want to achieve too, because if you want to add muscle mass, like let's say you want to improve your anaerobic capacity, adding muscle mass is a great way to do it, especially if you're doing your anaerobic capacity stuff and you're like, man, I want to work on my one minute power and it's just not getting better. You may need to add muscle mass if this is a thing that's really important to your riding and racing. I'm doing this with a couple athletes this winter. We need to add muscle mass so they can have a better anaerobic capacity. So when you do this, like bodybuilder rep ranges are basically any rep range, any load between like 30, I think is the low end to like 80% of your one rep max. As long as you get pretty close to failure, you're not doing it wrong. Like you can build muscle mass like this. And especially if you're like prone to injury or whatever, like if you can get the stimulus with lower loads, that's a good thing. You don't have to like have a big weight on the bar just for ego and showing off. Well, maybe if there's that person in the gym you want to show off for, this is going to influence your decision. But, you know, that's a particular strategy that you can employ that you don't necessarily have to. I would say the other thing there too is that typically lower loads. are going to require less neural drive. So you could do more. Like if you have to just do like how, how mentally exhausting would it be to do two rep maxes to failure, like to muscular failure, not to neural failure, but to muscular failure. Like you may not actually make it because your brain is just like, I can't, I can't do this. I can't just keep doing doubles until failure. Yeah. We would just bury you under that squat rack. Yeah. Whereas if you're doing like, I don't know. Isolation Bicep Curls. It doesn't take as much mental force to do isolation bicep curls, so you can put on 25 pounds or whatever and do a bunch until failure. Oh, yeah. I think I texted you about this the other day. I got out of the gym and I was like, muscle isolation machines have a special place in hell. Yeah, yeah, totally. And it's because it takes a little bit less neural drive, so you can just really crank it out, but then you... Yeah, your brain's not as tired, but your muscle is like... And actually, you know what's funny is that endurance riding does have a certain degree of neural fatigue. I'm 90% sure I've seen research that says that if you do like two hours of endurance riding for... blah blah blah and you get to the end of it then you try to do like a max sprint or one rep max on the squat or whatever it is you can do less than before and you know not only is there could there be muscular fatigue involved here but also neural fatigue potentially as well so I need to do more research on that so If I'm wrong on that, I really apologize. Don't quote me until we do a Wattstock on it, which will be approximately the year 2052 at this rate. Add that to the pile. Just throw it on the pile. Okay, so what about functional type stuff? Because I think if you see like Mike Boyle or a lot of... Other strength and conditioning coaches who are really well known and well regarded, I regard them highly as well. Like Mike Boyle would say maybe instead of doing heavy squats, although I'm pretty sure he does have people do heavy squats, he would say one of the main exercises that you might want to look at instead is something a lot more involving a lot more of the muscle chain. You know, what place does this have in cycling and strength training in general, would you say? I would say there's nothing wrong with doing something that will make you live longer potentially or a more full life or be able to do more things. But to imagine that a pistol squat off a box is also somehow going to magically make your sprint better is a little silly. And ideally, you're actually taking the strength that you're building in a gym with very not cycling specific exercises and turning that into something cycling specific by riding your bike and doing bike sprints. But I think that if they're something that you like and that is fun for you, and especially because it's the off season for a lot of people in the Northern Hemisphere, if that's something that you like and it's not going to be completely debilitating to other things you're trying to do, like nothing wrong with that. Nothing wrong with doing them. Doing them first might not be great because then you're going to be... kind of making yourself tired for the other things that you want to do in the gym. But if it's something that you like and you're not going to hurt yourself doing, like if you see someone do, I don't know, safety squat bar kickflips or whatever, maybe don't do those. But if you've decided that you like some of these things or you want to take some time, not 20 hours a week, but you want to take a couple hours a week doing. Something in a gym that you find enjoyable that you can do safely. There's nothing really wrong with that. Yeah, I agree. And also I think that, you know, with where do you put these? I would say put them last. Like, because with you and with everybody, I always put the heavy stuff first. And sometimes I'll put the explosive stuff either before or after, depending on where I think the neural activation is going to lie. But that's another podcast. And then functional stuff like assistance exercises afterwards. Oh, here's a good one. Google Seven Way Hips by Ryan Flaherty. That's a really, really good functional hip exercise that I give to literally everybody. Kyle, you've done it a million times. What's your take on stuff like this? Yeah, I think, well, I always interpreted that as like a glute medius work because a lot of people, not just cyclists, but a lot of people generally have... Much stronger quads and glute max than they do glute medias. And so just doing that work to, especially at the end, it's low, no weight, it's higher volume, and you just kind of do it until you feel the burn. Yeah. And then you call it a day. Well, it's the funny thing is like it's 15 reps of each of seven exercises. And some of them I feel are very easy. And some of them I feel are extremely difficult. And I can do them without even going into the gym. and I'll still feel that fatigue and I know it's hitting muscles that I don't get with heavy lifts. And I think this is something that like a lot of people in strength training and, you know, even like bodybuilding and stuff like that are getting more turned on to is, you know, you can only tear so many biceps and like shoulder muscles and whatnot before you go, oh, I think we need to like... Pay attention to the smaller muscles that you don't see from the stage. And the same thing goes for cycling. Like if you are finding that you're more comfortable on the bike, if you do a couple push-ups every day, I think that's great. You should do that. But if you're doing a couple push-ups every day and you're not noticing any difference and you don't want to do them, fuck it. Who cares? Yeah. I would say this also... The seven-way hips, I also kind of lump into the idea of doing additional core work. Like some people feel like, oh, their low back, their abs, whatever, get really sore on the bike. And they find that by doing more core work or something like good mornings that that gets better. And if that works for you, great, do it. If you've done some of planks and good mornings or whatever, other kind of core work on your own, you feel like it doesn't really help you that much, maybe you don't deen it. Not to mention when you're deadlifting or squatting and stuff like that, you get a lot of isometric core work. Kind of for free. I won't call it exactly for free because you do have to brace hard. It's not like one of those, you're wearing one of those as seen on TV EMG belts on your abs that'll just like gently work out your abs while you eat donuts on the couch. Well, even then like that, the contraction there isn't even voluntary. It's involuntary. So like you still have to work on getting your brain to turn on your abs in order to brace for a squat or something like that. And this actually, yeah, sorry. and that actually turning your abs to brace for a squat I think does have some carryover to cycling in that when you get up to go sprint you hear a lot of people like how do I sprint I feel like my sprint form is bad and a lot of people will say like well when you get up to go to gear up for a sprint like you do actually have to engage your core and brace almost like you're going to do a deadlift or a squat because if you're Core isn't stiff and you're trying to put out a lot of force with your legs, you know, Newton's Law is going to kick in and you're just going to kind of be floppy and some of the force is going to go into the pedals but then some of the force is going to go back up into your upper body and your body is going to move around or something. Yeah, the force is going to go into like twisting your torso as opposed to just being applied to the watts or to the pedal. Yeah. And that's actually a question of specificity too, like specific exercise selection. Like if we are generally mostly still on the bike, to what degree do things like push-ups or rows help us? And to some degree, those dynamic movements can help us a good deal because they'll teach us to turn on muscles that we normally don't turn on, especially if we're still. Like if we're rowing, we can think about using muscles in our shoulders that... We normally don't think about turning on on the bike that may entirely be useful for more stability when you're riding a long time. You know what I mean? Yeah, for sure. And I actually do like to throw in rows, you know, dumbbell rows like once a week. Just, you know, the position is vaguely bike specific. You know, you're usually not ever pulling on the bars. Except for a start, but usually you're pulling on the bars with one arm at a time and then the other like sprinting. And you are bent over and if you're doing them not on a machine, then you do have to use your core and your low back and your shoulders and abs to keep yourself steady as you row. And it just feels good of something to do. Yeah. And so if you're, by the way, if you're looking for suggestions for exercises like this, I suggest picking up new functional training for sports by Mike Boyle. I've got it on my bookshelf. I refer to it. I crack it open probably once a month or something like that when I'm looking for something for someone. And so that's my personal approach with this is like if somebody is like, oh, I'm having this issue or I'm having this issue. Granted that I'm not a PT, I will always tell somebody to go to a PT, but if it's like a comfort thing on the bike or if it's like a form thing on sprinting, we'll work in and out different exercises and see if it starts to help over a couple weeks. And if that doesn't, then we work in something else. It's kind of a trial and error, very pragmatic approach to incorporating this kind of stuff. Or if people are in the Boston area, they can go to Mike Boyle. Yeah, so let's wrap this up with talking about cycling and lifting kind of in tandem. Like, where would you want to put what? And this is a whole other podcast that we could do a series in Wattstock with, but let's think about it in general terms. Like, in general, how would you add cycling into an already busy lifting schedule or lifting into an already busy cycling schedule? Well, unless you have no other commitments in life and just are able to eat and sleep and live that, you know, faux professional athlete life, you should probably realize that something has to give. You only have so much recovery. And if you have 15 hours of riding and you cram in seven hours of lifting because you want to lift three days a week, well. That might be sustainable for a week or two, but then eventually you're probably going to have a bad time. So firstly, it's being realistic with that. You cannot do all the things all the time. So that's one consideration. And secondly would be, what is your focus? Like if it's the off season and you're just kind of doing fun, longer rides with your friends, well then, yeah, you throw in some lifting. a couple days a week and you want to prioritize the lifting more so you do the lifting maybe earlier early in the week once when you're fresh and then you have some rides for a couple days maybe have a day off in there do some lifting again maybe do a day off or something like that before you do your rides or if maybe if it is more just maintenance lifting then you're only lifting once a week then you you still can't You shouldn't double up and do like, oh, I have a six hour endurance ride and then I'm gonna go to the gym afterwards and it's gonna be great. No, you're gonna find that that's not really sustainable. Yeah, I think first step is being realistic with what you want to focus on and what's important. And especially for the off season, realizing you don't have to go 100% all the time, especially now. Yeah, and I think that gets into a deeper thing with endurance training of like how hard should you go in the off season. I think we did a podcast on this once, like, what is bass really? And it was a joke. It was entirely a joke where I said or you said that the reason that you should do low-intensity endurance in the off-season is to get some time resting, which is, in hindsight, is only like 50% of a joke. And so strength training, actually, I find it doesn't quote-unquote count towards off-season intensity. It's hard for sure, and you need to eat appropriately a lot more than most people think, actually, for strength training. I've had people ask me before, like, oh, this lift session today, is this going to be carb-intensive? It's not that carb-intensive, right? Because the kilojoules are low, but... You can burn through a ton of glycogen in just like a set of five squats, like a couple sets of five at, you know, 70, 80% of your one rep max, which, you know, a set of five at 70% one rep max, I would put in the six RPE range. And if you do five of those, you know, your last squat might be like a seven or an eight, eight and a half RPE. And you could deplete like probably half your glycogen, I think. I'll have to double check on that study. I may or may not like it in the show notes. So look for that. And so you do need to eat a lot after these things and you need to recover properly. So with like cycling and lifting together, I usually suggest not doing anything over like tempo pace while you are lifting heavy twice a week. or three times a week even. Like if you're lifting three times a week heavy, you are probably not riding your bike that much because that is a lot, a lot of lifting. Also, I think some people will, you can, you probably can do some good riding while you still feel a little sore. Like we've said before, soreness does not exactly map 100% onto fatigue, especially if you're relatively new to lifting. But that doesn't mean that you can always get away with riding when you're sore, and you'll quickly realize when you're like, oh, I'm just a little sore, but I can do this, or when you're like, oh my god, I tried to start warming up and then just couldn't. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, and so that's something to pay attention to, is your fatigue levels in general, and thinking, what am I prioritizing now? If you have a particular target you want to hit for your endurance rides and you cannot hit them, then you either want to lower your target or you want to do less lifting, or you want to look at your diet and maybe eat more. And, you know, if you're trying to gain strength and you're not, if you're kind of stalling out, look at your diet, like your recovery. Do you need a rest week? Do you need a deload week? Do you need to eat more? Like there's a lot of things there. Reach out for me for a consultation on that, by the way. Empiricalcycling at gmail.com. Probably a good time for a plug. One of the other things is don't just take your off-season, you know, endurance ride. Training Plan, and tack on weights on top of it. Yes. Yes. You really need to consider both. It's not like, I think, and if you are going to do double days, my personal preference is ride in the morning, get three to four hours. This is informed by science, by the way, and also experience. Get three to four hours between riding and lifting, and you want to take at least a half hour nap. and you want to eat a lot between. That's my suggestion, ideally. But don't eat a lot right before the lifting. You want to get the food in at least an hour and a half, maybe two hours before you actually have to lift again. Also, or not that everyone wants to eat gels all the time, but if you feel like you need a little bit of sugar or something, there's nothing wrong with eating a gel. Even though it's kind of gross. You're like, ugh, eating a gel just to go to the gym. But sugar is sugar. Although I've made this mistake too and been in the gym and been like dying halfway through and been like, oh, there's the convenience store next door. I'm going to stop what I'm doing, go next door and buy a Coke and a package of cookies. And I've been that person like sitting there. Like just like when you bonk on a long ride, you're like, oh, this can of Coke and this box of cookies is saving my life. Yeah, nothing like gas station food, middle of the gym. No, literally, there's nothing like it because it makes you want to vomit. Anyways, do we have any more thoughts to wrap this up? Because that's pretty much all I had down for today. Yeah, that's what I was thinking. I think, you know, like we said, the other aspects, the more detailed questions about exact sets, reps, periodization, exercise selection, all those things are... This would end up like a seven hour epic if we dove into every single one. So we probably shouldn't. And hopefully this answers a lot of the basic questions that people have this time of year. And if it doesn't answer your questions entirely, well, you're going to have to hire an empirical cycling coach potentially. So anyway, with that said, if you do want to hire somebody as a coach, you can email me at empiricalcycling at gmail.com. I think the next 10 Minute Tips episode, we're actually going to cover exercise selection because that'll take us a little bit into the rabbit hole and into the weeds before we do a Wattstock series on strength training. So we'll do that. And what else do we got? Oh, iTunes ratings, by the way. We have almost 100 five-star ratings. Thank you all for that. I think it helps. I'm told it helps. So keep doing that. Share the podcast. We're ad-free if you want to donate at empiricalcycling.com slash donate. We have the show notes up on the website. May or may not put some studies up there from things we mentioned today when I do the edit down. We have some merch, empiricalcyclingpodcast.threadless.com. Again, coaching and consultation inquiries for strength training for if you're a sprinter, if you're an endurance athlete, if you're a mountain biker, if you're a BMX racer, you know, contact us, we can put together a strength plan, we can consult on strength training, we can put together training, etc, etc, etc. also on Instagram at Empirical Cycling weekend AMAs and the stories and I am actually going to start doing them while I'm in the gym I did that on Thursday that was kind of fun for a couple hours people ask me gym questions that was awesome so alright everybody thanks so much for listening and we'll see you next time alright bye everyone 