Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Coley Moore, joined as always by my co-host, Kyle Helson, and I want to thank everybody for joining us for the first episode of 2020. 2. That's it. So thanks everybody for listening. Please subscribe and share the podcast if you want to support it. And also if you want to support financially, the donations the last couple months have been extremely generous and we thank you so much for that. And you can do that at empiricalcycling.com slash donate because we are ad free. We will never be advertising Manscaped or you name it. It will not be advertised on the show. So we've got our show notes up on the website. There may or may not be a couple from this episode as we get through it. And if you have any coaching and consultation inquiries, questions or comments, shoot an email to empiricalcycling at gmail.com. That goes straight to me. And also on Instagram, we have the weekend AMAs up in the stories. That's at empiricalcycling. And just hang out there. Give me a follow if you want. And let's see. So today we are going to do some 10-minute tips because I had actually recorded. did an interview for the first podcast for this year, and the audio files didn't go so well, but the guest was extremely nice, and we're going to take a mulligan, so that'll be coming up next week. So for now, Kyle and I are taking a mulligan on a functional training episode because my computer died two weeks ago, and I lost the files. Didn't make it to the backup files, but anyway, here we go. So let's talk about functional training. So I was thinking about, I haven't titled it yet, but I was thinking about something like, when is functional training too functional? Or when is it dysfunctional? Yeah, when is it dysfunctional? So the idea I wanted to get to today is, you know, when we look at functional training... Well, let's discuss what it is and then what kind of stuff we usually see and then we'll kind of, you know, maybe categorize or look at a spectrum of like the good, the bad, the ugly and the hilarious. So, okay, so I googled functional training because, you know, that's where you go for definitions of things. I've got it right up here at the top. Used to describe exercises that help you perform activities in everyday life more easily, typically use the whole body, definitely multiple muscles, and emphasize core strength and stability. So I don't see anything wrong with that. What do you think, Kyle? Yeah, I think that definition sounds perfectly fine to me. I think that functional training has become really popular over the past few years, and so people may just Instead of seeing that written definition, they may be working off of just social media posts or other things they can consume on the internet without actually looking up that formal definition. And so what the public lay understanding of what functional training is may be very different from what you just read if you just polled 100 people and asked them what functional training was. Yeah, so why do you think somebody would go for functional training? What do you think their choice is? Is it like, I don't want to get too big, I want to just be healthy, so I'll do functional training, or I don't know how to squat or deadlift, so I'll do functional stuff, or is it more reactionary, do you think, to the typical training styles in the gym, which is powerlifting, bodybuilding, and You know, strength and conditioning for sports. Yeah. I think both and neither maybe depending on who you are. So I think one big area where people feel like they need functional training or maybe really are attracted to functional training is if your job requires you to have some base level of like pretty high fitness. Like if you are an active duty military or if you are a firefighter, for example, your job like Not dying at your job requires you to have some sort of base level fitness that's going to look very different than going into the gym and just like bench pressing and squatting and deadlifting. So almost in the same way that you could imagine a cyclist to get better at riding your bike, you ride your bike or you do things that are bike race like. functional training and doing more movements and say like sled drags, loaded carries, things like that look more like the things you'd have to do in those strenuous jobs as opposed to lying on a bench and doing bench press or something like that. And then I think on the other hand, where you have people who are more intimidated by traditional sort of either bro splits or powerlifting, Olympic weightlifting, what have you. And so they want to do something that seems more approachable and because a lot of times for a lot of functional exercises you don't use nearly as high of loads maybe that also seems more approachable for people and then I think lastly CrossFit has done a lot for this idea of functional fitness and I think the popularity of functional fitness where I think One of the origins in the popularity of CrossFit is that it does make you a better well-rounded person or athlete or more capable because you're not just doing squat, bench, and deadlift or something like that. Yeah, and I would say also that – actually, no, forget that. Why don't we go in this direction instead? Why don't we talk about – what do you think about – is the ability for functional training to be like a replacement for typical training. Like, cause you know, you go to CrossFit class, you're still going to squat. You're still going to do typical stuff like, you know, pull, well, whatever they call pull-ups over there. Um, but you know, clean and jerks, um, you know, rows, like you're going to do normal stuff and stuff that I, not in a million years of training could I like ever do a. What do they call it? Muscle up on the rings? Oh my God, no way. So they are really serious athletes, not to shit on them too much. It's just for fun. Just for fun. I love everybody who does CrossFit, especially my friends who are listening to this right now, especially the CrossFit gyms where this podcast gets played. How you doing? We see you. So I don't know. Yeah, go ahead. Sorry. I think that is also one of the things that you may not see. TuneIn, Watch the CrossFit Games. You just see them doing more of these Metcon or maybe more functional style stuff. You don't see the fact that, yeah, obviously to be a successful CrossFitter, you have to be good at squatting, deadlifting, overhead press. They don't do as much like bench press stuff, but the number one most successful male CrossFitter of the recent years, Matt Frazier, was a very high level Olympic weightlifter up until he got injured. and so it's not like he was off the couch and just decided to dive straight into doing all this CrossFit stuff with like no background in sports or strength training at all but I think that it yeah it just maybe seems more fun and more approachable in this kind of like group environment but you do if you go to a CrossFit class and I've done I've done them before a lot of times they will have some sort of Metcon like conditioning Okay, that's the second time you've said that and I've never heard it before. What's Metcon? Oh, Metcon is what they use as a shorthand for metabolic conditioning. Oh God, okay. It feels a lot like a, I don't know. something like a five it's like a typically like somewhere between a five to say 20 minute ish effort of like you doing rounds or repeats or whatever of exercises or lifts or things like that so that it to me as someone who has done other sports it feels a lot like you're either like kind of at that high level kind of like grinding away like VO2 max type like five to eight minute effort type thing or you're grinding away like a 20 minute effort like you know. type intensity where it's hard, but obviously if you just go all out the first minute, you're just going to blow up and die. Okay. All right. I got you. So where were you going with that? But you'll do one of those, but you may do an hour of working on like squats or something before that, right? Like just showing up for that 20 minute workout of the Metcon or whatever is not the whole picture. Even though when you just watch the CrossFit games, that looks like all they do. I guess occasionally they do one rep max squats or Clean and Jerks or stuff like that. But what gets all of the views is them doing all of the more interesting looking like rope climbs and sled drags and, you know, high rep snatches to failure or whatever. Right. Okay. So, you know, what I kind of got out of you mentioning Matt Fraser there is that, you know, the idea that of functional training being able to fully replace other types of training. It sounds like, because I agree with you there, it sounds like we're leaning more towards a no in that it can be supportive of main strength exercises, or even if that's your focus with the crazier, more functional stuff, the main strength exercises will support the functional stuff. Is that kind of where we're heading? I think so, yes. And I think also if you look at people doing CrossFit style workouts, let's say, as conditioning for MMA or jujitsu or something like that as well. That's not like they don't do any MMA specific strength training, right? Like they're doing that as a sort of an add-on, not as like a full-on replacement. And I think the other thing is that, especially for the people in the CrossFit games, like they're not just doing 30 minutes of working out a day. They're doing a lot more, right? They're also, I don't know, people in cycling are 15, 20, 25 hours for a lot of, like, I don't know if you just saw, like, Wout Van Aert just posted, like, how many hours he spent training in 2021 or whatever. But it's like 20, 25 hours a week for the whole year. And it's not like, you know, elite CrossFitters are just doing 30 minutes a day because their functional training replaces all of the other workouts that they have to do either. Yeah, well, I couldn't imagine. doing more than two or three hours in the gym just doing anything. Anyway, that's where I tap out with my workouts. Let's explore the continuum of functional stuff because by our definition of it, including the whole body, the question is, does a squat count as functional training because it includes the whole body? It needs a lot of core strength. You know, it'll make you better at your daily life, whether it's getting up from a chair when you're older or, you know, being able to pick up something heavy off the ground. I don't know, you're moving a rock in the garden or whatever you got. Yeah. So does that count to you? Because it kind of counts to me, but I think in some ways because a squat doesn't have enough instability. stability in some ways. It's like if you can squat a lot, that doesn't necessarily mean you're going to be able to throw somebody over your shoulder or not out of a burning building, right? Right. Yeah, totally. Or conversely, if you can squat a lot, I can squat a reasonable amount, but I wouldn't be able to do a World's Strongest Man Atlas Stone lift very well just because, yeah, you're kind of bending over and you're kind of standing back up, but it's very much not the same. Well, the Atlas Stone, that's a rounded back pickup, and those stones are not light. I don't know if I could straight bar deadlift the amount of weight those guys are picking up. They also weigh like 400 pounds, so it's fine. No, and I agree with you. The squat in and of itself is pretty functional, I would say, for day-to-day activities. Like you said, getting older or what have you, even standing up can be difficult for old people who have severe atrophy and things like that. So in that sense, yes, it's very functional. but I think yeah people look at it and be like oh it's very rigid like things that you pick up in life aren't usually barbell shaped except when you're at the gym so that I think is one of the first things that people say oh well you don't usually encounter these like very nice neatly shaped weights that you can easily put on your back and that's true like we said like with an atlas stone or something or you're like a moving box like your buddy offers to give you pizza and beer and so you reluctantly say that you'll help them move and you're like oh fine I guess I'll do it and then you're like you know recreating that scene from friends where you're yelling pivot with a giant couch that is if you could squat more would carrying the couch be easier yes probably almost certainly But if you did some other sort of like loaded carries, farmer carries, things like that, would it be maybe just as good? Maybe? If you just did atlas stone lifting instead of, and would it make you better at lifting a couch than just doing squats? Probably. Well, here's the thing. Like we can look at it in two ways. You know, we can, you know, it's actually hard to define strength, by the way. You know, it can be like. How much force can your muscles produce? But force you can produce is specific to the kinetic chain, the length of the kinetic chain, how many joints do we have? So if we're doing like an overhead press, I can overhead press one rep max, like maybe, I don't have any upper body muscles, so maybe 135 pounds. My one rep max bench press, I tested like... year and a half, two years ago, and I'm sure it hasn't gone anywhere, was 185 pounds. That's all I got. I'm not like, you know, I'm fine. I'm not, you know, that's like almost my body weight at this point. And, you know, when you want to measure strength, typically in a lab, you do it isometrically. You'll do like mid thigh pull or you'll do something like you'll sit on a chair that's got your You're like strapped down like with a seatbelt and then you've got your quad is held here and your, you know, your lower leg is held here. I think usually it's called a shank. And so then you try to whatever angle they decide to put you at, you try to create as much force as humanly possible there. But that's not a squat. And also like a squat isn't a squat. So if you squat. In a Smith machine, that's very different than a barbell, just a free weight. And so this kind of gets into maybe a spectrum, a continuum of functional. So I would say like single joint isolated movements, like you might measure quad strength in a lab, is probably one of the least functional things that there is. Would you agree? Oh, for sure. Yeah. Yes. you're removing all of the, these other variables, why it makes sense for a lot of lab measurements. So that's a lot of times a return to activity benchmark for people who have ACL reconstruction, but that's because it's really easy to test consistently and repeatedly over and over and over again, as opposed to, I don't know, Bosu ball, kick flip squats or something. I love that guy. Um, well, yeah. And like, also there's a technique component. to squats where if you're teaching somebody with an ACL reconstruction, if you're testing their strength with a squat, the first time they get back to it after not using their knee really for what, three, four, six months even, your first squats are not gonna be good and you're gonna be stronger in the next couple of weeks no matter what, as long as you do a couple more squats. And so does that mean that your knee is stronger? Well, I mean probably but only with a squat and if you test it some other ways it's gonna be maybe weaker or stronger like that so you know in that case I could see the isometric thing being you know just a pure measure of quad strength in that thing like you got to pick a standard it's like you've got to pick a standard for temperature before we knew what absolute zero was we had to pick you know how do we measure temperature there's no reference other than like where does water freeze 32 32 Fahrenheit. That's so stupid. No, it makes sense. Zero Fahrenheit is about as cold as you could imagine the weather if you're Mr. Fahrenheit. And 100 Fahrenheit, that's about the temperature of Mr. Fahrenheit himself. So that makes sense to me. Actually, oh, I just remembered I know where zero Fahrenheit comes from. I may or may not cut this out because this is totally a complete tangent. But zero Fahrenheit comes from The coldest that somebody could make, not the coldest. Okay, so the guy was figuring out the coldest that he could freeze water at. And if you add solutes like ammonia and stuff like that to water, the freezing temperature goes down. And so that was the lowest that he could actually get his water solution to freeze. And that's what he decided to call zero. That makes sense. There we go. Celsius. Extremely logical. Anyway, Celsius, not so functional, huh? Yeah. Okay, so we were talking about the spectrum of stability, I think. So when it comes to stability, like Smith machine stability, studies have shown that When you do like a bench press in a Smith machine, there's no backward and forward motion anywhere, right? And so the neural drive that you would normally have to balance the bar over your chest, you're not using it anymore. So you can actually press a whole lot more weight like that, as opposed to using a free weight in a barbell. Now, if we start to add more instability, like let's say we put Let's say we put the bench on the center of a seesaw. Or if we put the two sides of the bench, the feet on Bosu balls, like put on the flat part. If we start hanging weights with rubber bands from the ends of the bar, now we are adding more instability. And now let's say the bar is not rigid. Now what? So now we're adding more and more degrees of instability into this whole thing. So in one way, I see that as good general training when it comes to stability. In some of my athletes of all ages, by the way, you might think this is something that typically happens when people get older, and it is, but it happens in all ages, where if you do a single leg straight leg deadlift, that's the one where you're on one leg and you've got a weight in your hand, and then you hinge at your hip and you keep your knee straight. Some people have a very hard time doing this. They're unstable. And so if we were to lock them into a Smith machine, it would be a lot easier. This is a very lightweight, so now we've got, let's compare this to like a squat, right? Now, so let's, so Kyle, what would you say is the difference between like a heavy squat in like a Smith machine or free weights versus like a single leg straight leg deadlift? Like what are the different purposes here and why might one be better for more strength training, typical that we might see, and one be better for functional stuff? Yeah, if you're main goal is just to get stronger and perhaps even including hypertrophy, putting on a lot of muscle, then something like a squat where it requires high forces and is also an exercise where because you are relatively stable, your body allows you to output high forces with high loads. that is more preferable for those situations as opposed to something like a single leg RDL or straight leg deadlift, stiff leg deadlift, whatever you want to call it, where there's a balance component because you're already on one foot. All right. And a lot of times you will only be holding the weight in one hand so that it adds even more to the balance component. This is... Both can be both useful for coordination. So you're just not very coordinated and you want to work on it. Or I've seen people do this also if you're returning from a hip or knee injury, especially on that side, then you try to do this because you have to be able to balance again and feel like what it's like to use just that one leg instead of favoring that leg by doing bilateral exercises. And then also because it's relatively lightweight, if you do want to do With higher reps, it is much easier if that's like, say your goal, additionally, if your goal is hypertrophy and you want to do a bunch of high rep stuff, then it will be less systematically fatiguing if you have to do, or systemically fatiguing if you do this more, we'll say functional exercise. Because the weight's lower and you don't have to pick up. Right. Well, I think that's an interesting thing that I think is, you know, in some functional training philosophies, This might be an over-interpretation of what my interview with Patrick Smith, by the way, that Perspectives episode, I forget if it was three or four. Anyway, go check that out. It was a really cool listen, really cool interview. Great conversation. Love talking to that guy. So he talked about rules. And so to me, this sounds like a rule. Light weight is better because less injury risk. So does that mean that it's better to make the exercise unstable or functional enough so that we are at the lightest weights we could possibly use because you can't possibly do this with 40 pounds safely. You have to do it with 20 pounds as opposed to doing it with like 100 pounds, which now is heavier and has a higher injury risk. So it seems to me that this rule, lighter weight is better because it's less injury risk, can actually still get you injured if you are unstable enough and you fall over, like you fall off a box or something like that. True, yeah. And I also think that this idea that lighter weights is always less injury risk, that is true, but most people, when they have... the ability to lift really heavy weights didn't just roll up to the gym and be like I know I'm gonna squat 400 kilograms today and just like straight out the gate load up a barbell unrack it and like see what happens they are able to do a 400 kilogram squat because they've worked up to it over years and years and years and so the injury risk is somewhat lower than if just You know, random person off the street decides they're going to try to squat 400 kilograms. Well, firstly, random person off the street probably can't unrack 400 kilograms, so it's probably okay, but. Yeah, I couldn't. I can barely look at it. I don't think I could rack 400 kilograms as in putting 400 kilograms on a bar. I think that's where I would stop. Yeah. I think. But I think. Oh, sorry. I just fucked up my pen. Go ahead. No, but I think you're right. I think the idea that you're doing something still challenging because there's instability, because there's a balance component, but using less weight, you might think, oh, because it still feels hard and there is this challenging aspect of balance involved, that that is just as good or an equal replacement because it's still hard to doing a more stable exercise. with heavyweights. And we've talked about this before where just because it's hard doesn't necessarily mean that it's... Well, because that's an RPE decoupling, right? It's a rating of perceived exertion decoupling where just because an exercise or anything is harder does not mean that you're going to get more adaptation. Like if you are like completely overtrained, everything you do is going to be hard. That does not mean it's going to be better for you. And the same way here is like if you want to get stronger, you need high tension on the muscles. And we talked about this a couple episodes ago, but basically like if we're in a squat, you know, if we go deeper and we have a little lighter weight on our back, that is going to be about the same stimulus on the muscles as having a heavier weight and not going as deep. Because when you don't go as deep, if you're like, I can half squat like a lot of weight, but my knees do not like it in any way, shape or form. And if I'm doing deep squats, my knees are like, come on, let's bring it. Like my knees hurt more just like sitting in a chair funny. than they do from heavy squats, which is how you know I'm in my 30s. Well, I think an extreme example of this is a lot of high-level professional bodybuilders can potentially squat very, very high loads, but a lot of them don't because it's just not worth it, and they do higher reps, 10, 15, 20 reps, as opposed to those Glory Day videos of Ronnie Coleman doing, you know, five reps with 800 pounds or whatever. And now the guy has to use a wheelchair 90% of the time, right? Like there's a huge, huge, huge injury risk to your joints and connective tissues when you go super, super ridiculously heavy. Yeah. And it's funny though, because a lot of studies that look at, you know, weightlifters' knees and powerlifters' knees say that they're usually healthier. than the average person's niece who's never lifted a weight before. But it is one of those things, like the dose makes the poison, and if you're really going for it, and especially if you're roided up, you can get your muscles to grow more than your bones can handle, it seems. Yeah, yeah, yeah. No, that's the thing too, right? With a lot of these huge... bodybuilders, way off topic now, but a lot of these huge bodybuilders, if you're doing steroids or whatever, it's going to make your muscles grow, but not necessarily your joints and connective tissues to the same degree, which makes that injury risk that we like to talk about. But that being said, right? Yeah, go ahead. Go ahead. Oh, okay. I was going to say that I think it's interesting that we touch on bodybuilders now because in a lot of bodybuilders, they're usually looking at all the big muscles that you can see from the stage, right? When it comes to modern bodybuilding, a lot of the more cutting edge people and coaches that I'm aware of actually use functional training to supplement their main lifts. You do your main stuff and then you grab the really light weights. You'll see people with huge muscles with 15, 20 pounds doing weird arm exercises because they're working the small muscles that you don't see from the stage. without them can lead to injury like they can tear or other muscles, the main muscles can tear. And they're just being a little more conscious of this kind of thing and that supplementing with functional training has great health benefits for them. Yeah. And I think that also gets into something that people like about functional training is they think that in addition to hitting your quads and glutes and hamstrings, you're going to also get like your adductors or abductors, things like that when you're doing unstable lower body exercises. And that's true to a point, right? Like it does help you hit those other muscles, but at some expense of being able to put the most stress directly on increasing your maximal leg quad force, something like that, right? Yeah. Well, because if you're off... Balance a little bit, you know, what's actually happening is you're using your neural drive to add to your stability. And this is the kind of same thing that we see in the bilateral deficit, which we touched on an episode a couple episodes ago, where a bilateral deficit is like, you know, what can you, what force can you create on one leg versus two legs? It's kind of the opposite thing of, you know, the blood distribution. in VO2 max to one leg versus two legs. One leg's VO2 max in knee extensions might be three liters, but if you now add both legs, it's not six liters, it might be four liters. And this is kind of what happens in bilateral deficit is if you can, let's say, create 100 kilograms of force with your right quad and your left quad together, it does not necessarily translate to 200 kilograms of force. It'll be like... 150 or something like that. Right. Yeah. And so when we are looking at the higher RPE stuff with the functional training, so that neural drive that would be going to using your main movers more is actually going to using your stabilizers more. And I think that's actually okay because there's very little balance component in you know doing a regular squat or actually I think the exercise with the least balanced component is probably the bench press especially if you've got that one inch range of motion kind of big barrel chest you know rounded back thing going on you know yeah your stereotypical elite powerlifter bench press where the goal is to reduce the range of motion to as small as possible so that you can lift the heaviest weights yeah And I think that's a good point, too, where a lot of the functional stuff may come from people who are pushing back against the idea that training only has to look like bodybuilding or powerlifting training, which for a lot of sports, especially when you start lifting in high school or something like that, like I remember lifting for football in high school, and the lifting program we followed was absolutely just some sort of hand-me-down like slightly modified bodybuilding style split, like upper, lower, upper, lower type thing where, I don't know, when you're 14, 15, it doesn't really matter. Like you, you like look at a barbell and you get stronger. Um, but I think some of the functional training aspect may be pushing back against that. Cause yeah, you look at some of the way that lifts that people do in elite powerlifting and you're like, that doesn't look functional at all. And you're probably right. Like being able to bench press 800 pounds over a six inch range of motion. isn't going to, you know, like in your everyday life, it isn't going to be that useful. Yeah. Six. Wow. That's a lot. You can reduce that. Art your back more. Well, so let's talk about good resources for functional training. Like what kind of stuff can you do yourself to make things a little more functional to supplement your normal strength routines. So my personal favorite is the Mike Boyle book called New Functional Training for Sports. Now in here, he advocates, generally speaking, well, I read the book like twice and I've flipped through it, you know, hundreds of times, but I don't really remember them talking about using traditional heavy squats is the main thing. The main thing that they use instead, it seems, is some versions of single leg squats, which you can get fairly heavy. But they're looking at training athletes in this book, like field sports, where your ability to be a good outfielder does not hinge on squatting 300 pounds. You know what I mean? Right, yeah. I think also his big thing was he had a series of athletes with Low Back Troubles. And so they started migrating them away from doing back squats because they had a history of back injuries. And so then I think his progression was like he started trying to do front squats because you have a lower load and you have a more upright posture. So you have a lower, maybe a lower risk of ending up in loaded. like low back flexion which is usually the thing they say is bad especially if you have like disc problems and then I think from there his evolution was to look at more of these single leg exercises because you can reduce the load even more and then say if you're if you're loading a single leg squat with dumbbells in the hands or something like that or weight vest then you're not putting as much force or potential force, I guess, on the low back. Yeah. And it's, you know, that's generally good. But, you know, when it comes to people like you and me, if we were going to do this, it would actually be unsafe for us to, you know, because, you know, right now my single leg squat load is like in the mid 200s for reps. And if I get on a box with one leg with like 245 pounds on my back, I guarantee I'm ending up in the hospital and I'm probably going to put the next person who's standing next to me in the hospital too. Oh yeah. I mean, I think it depends. Like there's, um, actually there's a guy, uh, there's a gym out actually it's near, it's near T town, um, where I've seen, he coaches a bunch of Olympic weightlifters, but also other. athletes, like field sports and things like that. And he's, he's had some NFL players doing one rep max Bulgarian split squats, um, with like as much as I can, like two leg squat. Yeah. You know, you're like, oh, oh, that's why that dude plays in the NFL because he doesn't, he doesn't even look, he doesn't even like, they look strong, but it's not like he, it's not like a world's strongest man competitor size. And you're just like, oh. Shit, he just single leg squatted like 375 pounds. Yeah. All right. What do you have as a good resource for functional type training? I would say to maybe bring it back a little bit more cycling specific. And actually, I think there was a video just today. Sometimes Kate Courtney posts some Training Montages and obviously it's hard to judge based on Instagram posts because obviously she's not posting everything that she does but she does a mixture of what you would definitely term as more traditional strength training exercises with some other very clearly like mountain bike specific like functionalized gym work or balance work a lot of times like the I think the thing a few years ago was standing on a BOSU ball and like doing you know a 10 pound plate plate flip and things like that, which is obviously just a little bit of a gimmick and fun. But I think it certainly is an example of like functionalized things done well in cycling. That is one I can think of. Yeah. Well, I also think that – well, I like what she does also because it's really mountain bike specific. Right. Because on a mountain bike, when you're on uneven terrain, like balance is a big component and your body relative to the bike is in a lot of different positions relative to road cycling where it's fairly static and there's very little technique. I'm sorry. I know I'm going to get some hate from some of you for that, saying that there's not a lot of technique in road cycling, but there's not. In mountain biking, it's very, very technique focused. And especially once you get to like enduro and downhill, like, oh my God, the technique. And so for her, it's not functional to get through life so much as it is like a necessary component to really train for the sport. Although I think for typical road cyclists, you know, or gravel cyclists even, doing that kind of stuff would be more of a functional exercise. Yeah. The other example for reasons that you may want to include some functional exercises is because like can you imagine I don't know I assume Chris Froome needs help like putting suitcases in like the overhead bins when he gets on planes and stuff because like but I think cyclists obviously tend to have much weaker arms and upper body relative to their legs and so that I think is where something can be really functional working in I mean obviously you don't have to go nuts and Bench three days a week or whatever, and Mondays, International Chess Day or whatever, but throwing in some upper body pressing pulling movements, unilateral or bilateral, really, if you're a cyclist, either one is going to help make your life probably a lot easier, especially if you have a kid or something like that. You got to pick up your kid. You got to put, I don't know, stuff away in the garage, whatever. Yeah, and just learning how to turn on the different shoulder muscles. I'm still not good at this. Every once in a while, I'll do some rows or I'll do some presses. Even if I do it pretty consistently for a little bit, it's like, oh my God, I didn't know how to... I didn't know how to use my rhomboids or anything like that. And then after a little while and some Googling, it's like, oh, that's a rhomboid. I know how to do this like scap flexion or whatever it is. See, I don't know anything about upper body still. Sorry about that, folks. but you know you're not gonna like build muscle or anything like that because I think that might be a concern for some people like oh am I gonna put on a bunch of weight if I do this well if you train heavy and you train like a bodybuilder yeah but if you keep it light like what's like a functional RPE range in the gym and rep range like four to five RPE for a sets of like two or three to sets of ten you know yeah I mean it's like it should be Like an enjoyable hard, not like a, oh, I'm not sure if I can do that last two reps hard. Yeah. Yeah. And for cyclists who really like to work hard, that's where you're going to go. But, you know, you can pull yourself back from that. It can be enjoyable. This can be the recovery ride intensity of lifting. All right. So, yeah, I think the other thing is, the other thing is if you are worried about putting on mass, like. or gaining too much upper body strength. There's too much upper body size. Remember that no one did four pull-ups and then ended up looking like they were headed for Mr. Olympia or something like that. So it requires a lot of serious dedication. And so you might seem like, oh man, I really can tell that you're putting on upper body size, doing like, I don't know, overhead press once a week, but it's probably in your head. Yeah. And also, Well, if you're like dieting or something like that simultaneously, you're getting leaner too. And so, you know, I've noticed it's easier to see if you're getting leaner than it is to see if you're actually getting bigger. Like I cannot tell if my quads are getting bigger. It's just one day my pants are really tight. That's all that happens, you know? Yeah. And I think also odds are very good if you're doing a significant amount of endurance mileage or volume. You're physically not going to be able to eat enough food every day to put on a lot of muscle mass. You would have to start eating chicken, broccoli, and rice every three hours. Again, you're prepping to be a bodybuilder or something. You just won't be able to do it unless you're drinking Ben and Jerry's every day or something. Well, is that a promise? No, that is something I heard that a retired NFL lineman had to do. He would microwave a pint when he had to gain weight because those guys are already huge and also have a high workload. So it's like, how do you gain weight? He would microwave a pint of Ben & Jerry's and drink it with dinner. Moving on. All right. So that's the good stuff. Now let's talk about the bad and the silly. Because I think there's a lot of stuff out there. We don't have to name names. But I think it might be useful for people to be prepared. I'm sure a lot of people have seen it already on Instagram. But be prepared for the kind of stuff that you would see in somebody who has really gone off the deep end with the functional stuff. Yeah. I think like with all things, moderation is good. Um, and moderation, maybe moderation, even in moderation. Anyway, um, I think that especially in the age of social media, people are going to be drawn to those exercises of those videos, whether you get a lot of looks, just whether they're good. Good clicks or not on Instagram. A click is a click. So if you tap that because you're like, what the hell is going on there? It's going to think, oh, people are interested in this for some reason or another. The algorithm doesn't necessarily know whether that's good interest or bad interest, but it's going to be like, oh, hey, we're going to keep showing this to people. And if you're trying to build a business and you're relying on Instagram. ads and traffic and stuff that makes sense. You want to put out stuff that's going to get people to be like, hey, what is that? I want to see it, even if I don't think it's a good idea. Yeah. Yeah, go ahead. Sorry. Also, with that, keep in mind that when you're looking at training, even good training on Instagram, it's not like you have a GoPro strapped to this person's face 24-7 to see all of the things that you're doing. You're only seeing the select cut. or the things that they want to show so this is definitely heavily filtered and there's obviously going to be a bunch of stuff that you don't see right like I don't know pick up like pull up like you know I don't know any professional athletes Instagram and even if they do show some of their training and you're like oh yeah what are they doing like let me try to glean something it's not like you're with them all the time to see it so you you can't even be sure what percentage of their time are they spending doing You know, safety squat bar kickflips. I don't know. Yeah. You just click on the one that has them jumping onto like 64 inches of plyo box and you're like, oh my God, how does this happen? You send it to all your friends. Like how many have we sent between each other? That kind of stuff. Yeah. Cause you're like, this is nuts. And like, I think there's that. It's like, I heard it. Someone once described as, as like watching fast and furious. to get tips on how to drive. That's pretty good, except, well, I guess there are, I was going to say except for Fast and Furious isn't real, but I think there are some people who think Fast and Furious is real life. Yeah. Tag yourself. But yeah, I think that's something to keep in mind too, that is this The really wild stuff. Is that actually what this person is doing for 100% of their training every time they go into the weight room or do their sport or whatever? And their odds are probably pretty good. It's no. And if it is, that's all that they're doing. You got to ask, like, does this person or these people who are really into this method, do they produce good results? And not to say that if you had a successful athlete, that means your methods are good, right? I think you've told the story about Brad Wiggins' coach as a junior or something, thinking that he was the world's greatest coach because he had Brad Wiggins. So anything he did, he just got faster and won bike races. Well, the lesson for him was like... He was like, oh, he thought he was really good for a little bit. Then he was like, oh, wait, yeah, I had Brad Wiggins. Of course, he was going to get better no matter what he did. Yeah, and there is that selection bias, too. Like, you know, a lot of people get where they are despite the training or work and not because of it necessarily. And I know that's a very complicated topic to get into and a very simplistic statement. So don't flame me for that, please. who deserve it. But have you seen some of the things Tom Brady thinks about training? Where you're like, oh, Tom Brady is Tom Brady not because of the things he thinks about muscle pliability or whatever one of those things that he thinks is why he's been so successful. Well, he also has weird ideas about anions and cations. And he thinks tomatoes are nightshades and he won't eat them. Something like that. Which is a shame because... Tomatoes are delicious. And I feel bad that Tom Brady is missing out on one of the big pleasures of life is tomatoes. So back to cycling and good stuff. Actually, I always remember one particular sprint cyclist, not to name names, but he was doing single leg squats. His front leg was on a BOSU ball. His rear leg elevated. And I saw it more than once. and I thought it was the most interesting thing because I was like well I want to know does he have like ankle like strength issues that he needs to work on or is this like an actual training thing like is he doing this to improve his like rate of force development because in some studies when you look at you know people doing unstable exercises Then you look at their general rate of force development, it gets better. But typically that's when you're like an untrained person or you haven't done any of that kind of stuff. And you're not used to rapidly having to correct for center of gravity shifting around a little bit. And, you know, that kind of thing is a very general training effect as opposed to, does this actually work in high level athletes? And, you know, I would not think so. I know a lot of high-level athletes who have never done that kind of stuff, and they're going fast just fine without ever doing single-leg squats on a trampoline or whatever. Yeah. And I think some of that could be that, again, if you don't exactly know, maybe it was some sort of rehab thing or something like that, or like you said, like ankle mobility type thing. Because I remember I had to do – like when I sprained my ankles, they'll give you – um very light not super heavy but squats with your unstaped with your bad ankle or like kind of lunge really more lunging onto a BOSU ball or something like that but that makes sense because if you just sprained your ankle like you have to figure out how to be stable on that foot again with some load or something and that's a whole nother discussion about functional quote-unquote functional exercises from like return to injury that's like a whole different thing which is not the the probably the purview of this discussion. Yeah. It's not. And we're not experts on that. And someday soon, I'm actually going to have an expert on that on the podcast. We'll talk about her research and it's going to be great. So you know who you are. You're listening. I know you listen to the podcast. So I'll be in touch soon. So let's wrap this up a little bit. So generally speaking, where are we kind of coming down on Functional Training fitting into general stuff for a cyclist. I would say it's actually probably really good to do during maintenance, like in season. You want to have a little bit of load, but you also want to just kind of keep yourself healthy, like more functional type stuff as opposed to really heavy squats is probably going to be the way to go, right? Yeah, and I think that also if you are, say it's the end of your season. and you're just kind of racing and you want to stay active but you don't want to dive straight into a bunch of volume or something like that. That's another good place to put it. Just to keep you active, like you said, you don't have to go to a 9 out of 10 RPE all the time. Get the blood flowing. Feel good. Feel like you're not going to have old person's shoulders and you can reach stuff off the top shelf. I think it's interesting. that you say that because one of the things that can really help in terms of just maintaining strength or functionalness as a human in season can just be some neural engagement of your muscles. Just a little touch of like, let's get this, let's be a little unstable. Let's do some bird dogs today with a band or let's do... Let's do those single leg squats with no weight on the front leg on the BOSU ball. Let's do that kind of stuff. You can have fun with this kind of stuff. But as long as it's not supplanting the main strength training that you want to do, I think have at it. Go have fun. Don't hurt yourself. Yeah. And also, if you're going to be in the gym anyway, and you want to do some of this. It could also be a good way to warm up before you do your heavier work. Like you want to get moving and you don't want to just step out of the bathroom, whatever, you're changing. You're like, all right, super heavy squat straight away. Yeah, I usually have people do some semi-functional stuff for warming up. You know, things like... Monster walks, clamshells, the typical kind of stuff, and even some planks. A lot of people who struggle with core strength and bracing their core in a squat, doing some planks, like front and side planks before you pick up a barbell can be really, really excellent for your technique and just feeling solid in a squat in general. All right. Are we about all done? I think that was pretty good. Not unless you want to... Just talk about some of the most ridiculous things. What's the most ridiculous? No, we don't have to. He's going to sue us or something. Well, hold on. Okay. Now I want to know. What is the most ridiculous thing that you've seen? The most ridiculous thing I've seen is definitely that guy who you know I'm referring to, who operates a facility in Georgia and has done just really strange... It's almost like contrast training where it has some sort of heavy 90 degree isometric component, but then like you chuck away the heavy weight and go into some sort of jumping or bounding leaping thing. Oh, I usually see the ones where he's got all kinds of weight dangling. Like there's some where he's got the safety bar on his shoulders. He's holding a He's holding a trap bar and he's got weights on rubber bands dangling from the ends of each of them and like one leg, two legs and you know what's the funny thing is like once in a while I see something that he's doing and I'm like actually that looks awesome but it's like one out of a hundred yeah yeah yeah and I think that's the problem too is that well he's really leaning into the clicks you know yep Yes, he is. I'm saying that to be charitable. I also think, yeah, I also think there was one, there was one the other day where he tried to break like a body weight adjusted one arm lockout. Oh, yeah. And the end of the video cuts off because he clearly fails to re-rack the bar and just drops like a... 400-pound barbell on himself, but he cuts the video out. I want to see that whole clip. Yeah, he made it onto one safety arm, and on the other, not so good. Just cuts right out. And then he could post more videos, so he's clearly fine. But that is functional training going very wrong. If he got seriously injured, I wouldn't be making fun of him. Yeah, me neither, honestly. All right. So thanks for sticking with us all the way to the end of this episode. Sorry we got off track, but hey, maybe football will increase the clicks. Who knows? I'm just kidding. If you want to increase the clicks, well, you share the podcast with a friend because that's really how the podcast grows. And thank you, everybody, for a great 2021. We will do a one or two episode wrap ups for 2021. We'll probably talk about the Instagram AMAs, maybe do another best of like we did for 2020. look for that that's at empirical cycling for Instagram and you know subscribe give us a five star iTunes rating be great share the podcast as always and if you want coaching inquiries consultation inquiries just shoot them at empirical cycling at gmail.com we always have people taking on athletes so if you're curious send an email we'll chat and maybe we'll hook you up with a coach and maybe not maybe just want to say hi that's cool too so thanks everybody for listening and happy new year Thanks everyone. 