Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Kolie Moore, rejoined, thankfully, by Kyle Helson. He's back, and we'll ask him where he's been in just a second. So thanks, everybody, for listening. If you are new here, please consider subscribing if you haven't yet. And if you are not new and you want to support the podcast, please give us a nice podcast rating or review wherever you listen to podcasts. You can share the podcast anywhere with forums, on friends. on forums or with friends. That word of mouth helps us a lot. And we are ad-free, so if you want to donate, kick us a couple bucks to keep the lights on here. You can do so at empiricalcycling.com slash donate. If you have any coaching or consultation inquiries, please shoot me an email, empiricalcycling at gmail.com. We are always taking on clients. We have special rates for professional and student athletes, of course. If you would like to consult with us, you can ask us any questions, our time's your time, and we can review your files, et cetera, et cetera. So now's a good time to do that if you're looking to gear up for next year or looking to review the previous year or what went right or wrong. Yeah, empiricalcycling at gmail.com. And at the end of this episode, well, it'll probably be half the episode, given the number of questions that we got asked. You can follow me on Instagram at empiricalcycling. That is where I do a weekend AMA. And that's also where we ask for questions for the podcast recordings for most of our podcasts these days. So if you want to ask a question over there, go give me a follow at empiricalcycling. And we've got some show notes up on the website. There will probably not be much up there for this episode. But Kyle's back! Kyle, where have you been? Yeah. Yeah. So I was, I was away for a little bit. I was 71, 72 days, depending on how you're counting. I was spending time in Fort Sumner, New Mexico, which is this small town in eastern New Mexico where there is a NASA balloon facility. The balloon facility exists there because when you're launching these high altitude balloons and they're You know, people like the common explanation is, oh, they're like weather balloons, but they're not really like weather balloons because they typically fly a lot higher and also the payloads can be a lot heavier. So we fly high altitude telescopes out there, we being NASA, and there are various sizes of telescope, but the maximum payload weight is up to about 6,000 pounds. So it's like flying up. So it's like flying an Escalade up on a balloon. Yeah, yeah, exactly. Yeah. It's like you got your Suburban. And these balloons are not small. They're fully inflated. The largest balloons are 39 million cubic feet in volume at float, which is pretty low pressure. Is that like a Macy's Day float or larger? Oh, it's larger. They're close to 100 meters in diameter, fully inflated. But because the pressure at float altitudes, which are 100,000 to 140,000 feet, the atmospheric pressure up there is like 3 millibar, 5 millibar-ish, so you're talking like a 300th to a, you know, 200th of atmospheric pressure. Oh, you're basically in space up there. Yeah, you're basically in space. Yeah, yeah. It's the height that maybe people remember from maybe, what, like 10 years ago, 12 years ago, the guy, Felix Baumgartner, like, jumped out, like, sponsored by Red Bull, he, like, jumped out of this capsule. at like 120,000, 128,000 feet or something like that, and he had to wear a full-on spacesuit. So that's the altitude we're flying at, and because on the ground, you want it to be, you put in the volume on the ground, the amount that is adjusted for the difference in pressure. So on the ground, The balloons look really underinflated and they look kind of sad. I mean, they're still like full of helium. It's still many, many, many, many liters of helium. But it's when you get up to those low pressures that the balloon fully expands because the pressure goes, the ambient outside pressure goes down and then the pressure inside and outside the balloon equalizes. It's sort of like when it gets cold outside and you get that low pressure temperature, low pressure warning in your car tires, right? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, because PV equals NRT. Exactly. So the big thing there is that, you know, they used to do a lot more balloon flights out of eastern Texas, but then sort of eastern Texas got a little bit too populated and it becomes too difficult to find a good place to, we'll say, land the balloons. And now, I think people assume... Tell me about the population thing, because while you were there, you told me something that I will never forget as long as I live. which is the risk calculation for a launch. And so that's one of the reasons you've got to go out into these, you know, middle of the desert kind of places, you know, 100 miles from, or 60, 100 miles from like even a moderately sized town. Correct, yeah. So the risk analysis, they've recently adopted a new risk model. I don't know, I don't remember exactly when they adopted this new model, but the model, Analyzes Risk, and they've done this for years, but the new computer model analyzes risk and quantifies it in terms of micro casualties. So you're given a number out of 10 to the minus 6. And the limit for launch is 100. It's 100 micro deaths. And that's basically just the risk on if... As the balloon is launching, it takes two or three hours to go from ground level to float altitude, so to get up to that 100,000 feet, so on your way up, if you fly over any very populated cities or any dense areas, is that going to be a risk that, you know, something happens during the first few hours, like there's a leak and the balloon just comes down, and it's worth noting that we don't have any, like... We have strong attitude control of the balloon itself. Like, we have the ability, typically, to steer and point the telescope, but we have no way of controlling the direction the balloon flies or, like, any of that. So people think, like, oh, you must have, like, fins or stabilizers or whatever, somehow be able to control the balloon, and, like, no, we just kind of, we don't even have, like... If you know how a hot air balloon works, right? Like a hot air balloon works because you can add or subtract hot air, which adds or subtracts altitude, and then you move around to find the prevailing winds that are going in the direction that you want, and that's how you steer a hot air balloon. We don't have that control. Like, it's just filled with helium. It slowly leaks out. There's no way of stopping it. We can't add helium. in flight. The only thing we can do to try to maintain altitude is we fly extra ballast and you just slowly drop ballast. And the ballast is literally steel powder. So we'll fly 600, 1,000, 1,500 extra pounds of steel powder and you just slowly drop the steel powder over the course of the flight to try to correct for... Oh, so you're not dropping like dumbbells or anything like that to get closer to today's topic? No, no, no. They're not like BBs. It's literally powder that just like disperses in the air. Yes, yeah, yeah, it looks like, if you've ever taken, like, sandpaper and sanded, like, taken, like, 100 grit sandpaper and sanded a piece of metal, it looks like the shavings and dust that come off of that. Like, it's not, it's not like it's BBs, where you're like, oh yeah, we're just, here we are, just dropping, you know. double-aught buckshot on everyone down below. Like, good luck to you. Yeah, could you imagine somebody like a passerby being like, man, I was one of the 100 micro-deaths today. I got shot by a weather balloon from NASA. Exactly, yeah, yeah. And then the other thing is that you typically have to find a place to bring them down. And so New Mexico, there's a lot of desert. So it's typically a pretty good place. As you start to leave New Mexico, like, we're sort of, where Fort Sumner is, in case you're not intimately familiar with eastern New Mexico geography. Well, there's probably 800 people familiar with the intimate geography of Fort Sumner, given that's the population thereabouts. Yeah, exactly, exactly, exactly, yeah. You're about an hour and a half from the Texas-New Mexico border, and so the balloons get launched there. Typically, they have an eastward trajectory as they get to float altitudes, but then a lot of times, especially early in the season, they start to blow westward, and so the longest flights will actually make it all the way to Flagstaff. Some of the flights that actually end up being visible from Phoenix and stuff like that in the sky, because it's kind of weird to think about, but a 100-meter diameter balloon, even at 120, 140,000 feet, is big enough that during the daytime, as long as the horizon hasn't hurt you, and it's like... you can actually see the balloon in the sky and so you can watch it like slowly move across the sky and then it gets even cooler because at nighttime even when it's become too small for you to see with your naked eye the sun reflecting off of it like near sunset is super cool because it'll reflect off really strongly and so you'll be seeing this like super bright like way brighter than a star or a planet or whatever so yeah if you've ever been in Arizona, New Mexico, and sort of August, September, and seen this weird-looking star thing. There's a good chance that it was a balloon flight. Wait, so you've been contributing to UFO sightings at your balloon facilities. Oh, 100%. 100%. Yeah. So we were about an hour and a half from Roswell. Fun fact. Of course. We went to Roswell a couple times because it's also like the second, it's like a third closest like big, we'll say big city. I think Roswell is like 100,000 people or something like that. Anyway, it's like significantly larger than Fort Sumner. Hold on, are all those people there for aliens? I wonder. We went to the UFO, International UFO Museum and Research Center. Definitely recommend checking that out in Roswell if you're ever passing through. Next time people are visiting Fort Sumner, be like, be sure to stop at Roswell, it's worth the trip. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Or honestly, now with Oppenheimer coming out, I think a lot of people are going to be heading out there because they want to try, I think it's today. Coming out, Kyle, it's been out, hasn't it? Yeah, that's true, it's been out. So, you know, time isn't real. You're literally like you just got unfrozen from a block of ice, dude. That's how I feel, yeah. We went to Alamogordo and went to White Sands National Park as well on one of our off days. Oh, I love White Sands. The White Sands Missile Range is out there, and I think today, I think October 21st, I think this is one of the two days per year that they open up the Trinity test site in the White Sands Missile Range. Oh. And so you can actually go in and see, and I'm sure the line this morning was insane because of the movie, but yeah, they... you can't actually get there to see it's still an active missile testing range so you can't actually get there anytime you want like that it's mildly dangerous and actually presents an obstacle for us because if if the balloons sort of head southwest out of Fort Sumner, they will head basically straight toward the White Sands Missile Range, so we have to clear it with the FAA and then also the Air Force and be like, hey, like, nothing's going on there, right? Like, you don't care if anything goes flying over you. Nothing's going on, wink, wink. Yeah, exactly, yeah, yeah, yeah. But yeah, and then if you get lucky, maybe head out to like, maybe you're, I mean, if you get unlucky, rather, The balloon could potentially land in the Gila National Forest, which would be a giant pain in the ass, because then you have to get a crane and big trucks in to pick up this 4,000, 5,000 pound telescope, and also a balloon that weighs 2,000 pounds. Yeah, the balloons are big. basically polyethylene and kind of like trash bag material, but they're so big, they weigh 2,000 pounds on their own. And then, of course, then you end up with that, like the fallen gantry thing that does happen at the Tour de France a couple times when the race goes through Gila. And you're like, sorry, sorry, everybody, I just ruined your preem. Everybody, we got to neutralize the race. We got Kyle's balloon. And while you're there, like live tweeting the race to immediate. Actually, that's a good question. I wonder, they used to also do a spring campaign in New Mexico. More often, they still can do it, but they don't do it as often, but I wonder if that's ever overlapped, because we had a couple of the payloads that we launched land out near Socorro, near the VLA, the Very Large Array, people may be familiar with that, but yeah, that's not so far from the Hila National Forest and Silver City and stuff like that, so yeah, it'd be weird. I've now spent a significant amount of time in New Mexico, either... You know, a couple weeks for bike racing, or a couple months for balloon flights, so, you know, fun times. Yeah, well, speaking of you, like, causing sightings of strange things, let's talk about something that can be seen from space, which is your quads. Yeah, okay. Maybe not now. It's been a couple months since I lifted, so, you know, I had to lift those, like, ballast weights in the high bay one night, just for funsies. Yeah, you sent me a picture of those, and I was like, that literally looks like scrap from Fallout 4. It's, so what it is, for people who don't know, it's basically the size of a 4x4, it's 4 inches by 4 inches by about 30, 34 inches long, solid steel, with like a rebar handle welded on it, and they use it to counterbalance and balance the telescopes and things like that at the balloon facility, and we had a couple of them in our high bay area, and so I was just like, oh, you know, back of the envelope suggests these weigh like 60, 70 kilos each, and so I did some basically trap bar deadlifts with them one night when I was doing shift work and stuck there until like two in the morning or whatever, you know. I bet that felt really good after not having like really exercised for several weeks. It was weird though because you have, you just have two of them and you're kind of like, how do I, how do I warm up for this? I just kind of... Yeah, just kind of do a couple and then add reps. You know, it's just kind of a strange thing. But yeah, it's like, oh, actually doing something. I did have my road bike in New Mexico, but with the work schedules we had and stuff like that, it got kind of hard to actually ride consistently because we were working weird hours, working a lot of hours, working, you know, weekends, nights, overnights, stuff like that. So you'd be like, oh, I need to actually sleep, like waking up early just to go ride my bike just to get wrecked for another. 8, 9, 12 hours at the high bay, like, kind of sucks. Yeah, I kept thinking, like, and for the first couple weeks, I kept programming workouts for you, and then it was just like, red, red, red, red, I'm like, ugh, RIP. Yeah, it's all good. No, honestly, like, I didn't think that I would be able to do anything, like, super consistently, but I was like, oh, maybe, maybe you will get lucky. But yeah, due to some constraints with how our instrument works and everything, we had to have someone there 24-7 to watch it. So that meant we ended up getting split up into shifts. And then for the balloon launches, they all take place at like 7, 8, 9, 10 in the morning, hopefully. But you start the process of getting ready for a launch at 1 or 2 in the morning. So if you have a launch day and you end up getting scrubbed, you end up getting scrubbed at like 6. Five, six, seven in the morning, eight in the morning sometimes, you're like, okay, I've been up now since one, and it's eight in the morning, I'm gonna go eat some food, and I'm gonna go back to sleep, and then maybe we try again tomorrow? You know, like, uh? I was gonna say, like, I think that's actually a good example to start with for people. getting into our main topic today, because we spent like 15 minutes talking about balloons, which I am fascinated by, and we could do this for an hour, but I think people are like, come on, get to the strength training, get to the tips. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So I think that's actually the first thing I want to start with, because we're talking about gym mistakes that every cyclist makes, and the first one is going to relate to sleep. because I think a lot of people, in my experience, a lot of this is gonna come from my coaching experience and also from my experience consulting with people who were like, this is how I'm programming everything, like, what do you think is happening? This is going right, this is not going right. And one of the things that doesn't go right is that people will put their strength training or they'll modify it because they wanna do strength training and writing as usual, they'll put it all in such a way that it really cuts into their sleep, like significantly. And I think that's one of the things that a lot of people are trying to do is they're trying to do everything all at once and it becomes too much and cutting into your sleep consistently like that, and you can even call this just for writing, but that kind of thing, it will impact your recovery to such a degree that like you probably have one good workout in you. from the last time you were fully recovered, and then you are screwed for like a week or two until you recover again. So does that sound familiar? Yeah, for sure. I mean, I think also you kind of have this problem where I think that kind of dovetails into people saying, oh, well, I'm just going to take my regular base season plan and, you know, maybe they're working with a coach, maybe they're not, but without consulting anyone else, I'm just going to add in extra sessions in the gym. And you're like, ah, yeah. Real quick, he started, I mean, and maybe that works for a few weeks or something, and then, yeah, it's kind of like the times when you say, yeah, like, every once in a while, you can, if you get, if you get a free period, a freer period in your life, you can just add a bunch of extra volume, and it can really help, but you can't, like, do that indefinitely. Yeah, it costs you. And also, in terms of, you know, if you are, like, looking to gain size and strength, or even if you're just looking to recover better from your bike sessions, sleep is, like, one of the most anabolic things on the planet. Like, if you're impacting your sleep, like, you are screwing your gains, like, either aerobically or strength-wise or both. Oh, definitely. Yeah. I mean, it's kind of strange to think, like, you know, you... There are days where you're like, oh yeah, I should get up early and lose an extra hour, hour and a half of sleep. Oh, but I'm going to get this workout in and that's going to be good for me. And you're like, that can be true, but you can't do that all the time and keep trading sleep for workouts because you think that's the first most important thing. Yeah, I could say maybe one or two days a week you can get away with that, but for the most part you really cannot. Like if I, if my sleep is impacted and I've got a strength session planned for myself for that day and I like, I normally get like maybe seven and a half to nine hours of sleep and I will, if I get something like seven or even like six and a half and I wake up kind of with that groggy feeling, I know for a fact and I also know from experience that that is going to actually increase my injury risk because you are starting to lack the brain power, literally the brain power for the neural drive to stabilize your torso. And so if you're squatting heavy, like I've done this before where I'm at the bottom of a squat and I feel my back starting to tweak out a little bit because I'm tired and I'm like, uh-oh, this is the path to injury and I rack the weight and I go home. Yeah, I think that's a good tip. For most cyclists, you're in the gym. because it is, you know, largely it's the off-season and it's going to be good and fresh and a new thing, new challenge for you. But you shouldn't increase your likelihood of being out for a year or something because, you know, you get a little bit of ego. And we've all been there, totally been there, not saying I'm perfect. Everyone likes a bit of ego lifting here and there. Well, that's why we have track bar deadlift. Yeah. But sometimes you're like, nope, and sometimes you know, like, oh, that was one too many, and that's gonna suck. Like, you hit that, yeah, that twins, that whatever it is, where you're like, that was, should have done that, and sometimes, unfortunately, you get to, like you said, where you irritate something a little bit, and hopefully you realize it and you stop, and you don't, like, push through it, you know? Yeah, hopefully, yeah. Like, because me heading your way through it, while it is such a gym bro thing to do, it's like, if you didn't lift it with good technique, You didn't lift it at all. That's that old Jim saying. And this is one of the reasons is that if you start accepting poor technique for a successful rep, then you are really just opening the door to injury risk. And you don't want to do that. And that's actually another mistake I've got on my list of mistakes cyclists make is they don't get their technique checked or they don't record themselves. And this is something that I do for my clients is I tell them always like it's the best thing you can do is Get a personal trainer to check your technique for your exercises, especially squat and deadlift. Those are very injury prone. Even something like leg press can injure you. And so you've got to make sure that you're not doing it wrong because otherwise there's a good chance that you can screw it up. And I'll give you a for instance. One of Katie's clients was doing squats and he had the worst Stripper Squat and Butt Wink all at the same time. And I'm like, wow, like this is horrible. Like his ankle mobility is really bad. And then he said, yeah, I had somebody a long time ago tell me that your knees are not supposed to go over your toes. And so I've been trying to keep them back. And I'm like, no, you want to push those way out over your toes. Like watch every Olympic lifter at the bottom of their catching a clean or or a snatch, and you're going to see some knees that are like, you know, miles in front of people's toes. Yeah, I think actually that brings up a good point too. There are, you know, you people I think sometimes get worried about doing things to full range of motion or at least a more extended range of motion. Obviously not everyone has a squat so deep that your hamstrings run into your calves and you don't have to necessarily, you know, try to Do deficit deadlifts or anything like that. But I think one thing, people get afraid of it because like, oh, I'm going to hurt my knees, oh, I'm going to hurt my back. But actually, if you do squat to, or just lift generally to a greater range of motion, you get the same or more stimulus using less weight. And so, provided that you approach it. and have an intelligent loading scheme and things like that and don't just start off with, oh, I finished last year at this weight, I can just dive right into it. You actually somewhat decrease your injury risk by using lower weights. Everyone likes lower injury risk, right? So if you can get the same stimulus for less weight just because you use a greater range of motion, that seems good. You're not there to be a... Competitive Powerlifter, where the raw total is what you're worried about. You're there to be healthier and improve your cycling. Yeah, and that's something that you can also think about is not sacrificing technique for depth, because a lot of people can get a lot deeper in their squat, for instance, if they allow their back to round and they allow some butt wink and they allow some stripper squat. Stripper squat, by the way, is where your butt rises. But your shoulders kind of stay in the same spot. So it looks like a stripper rubbing her butt up on the, or his butt, I guess, up on the pole or something like that. I've never been to a strip club, I don't know. So... And then you good, and then basically you good morning the weight up. Like you finish the rep basically using... all hamstrings and lower back, which is, that is an exercise, but it's not the exercise you want to do. It would be funny to see strippers with barbells out on the stage. I've pretty much only seen it in like the Sopranos in movies, I guess, so. Okay, so recording yourself is a good way to check for your technique too. So set up your phone, like record every set or every other set and watch it while you're resting between sets and think, okay, I need to do this, I need to work on this, I need to work on this. And that's one of the things that having like an in-person coach there a couple times can really help you with, especially if you are getting into the gym for the first time. So making sure that that technique is somebody's there to give you the right cues and not like over-cuing you and not under-cuing you where they just sit there for the whole like three sets and they go, yeah, okay, try doing this differently next time. It's like, help me out, man, like in the middle of the set, tell me like chest up or like grip the ground with your feet. I love that cue. That helps me a lot, et cetera, et cetera. So record yourself. The other, I would say the next big mistake people make is they do too many exercises in a session. Yes. Kyle, what's the, for heavy stuff on the legs, what's your average number of sets? Because I usually think about how many working sets do we have on the legs? That's how I usually think about programming a session. Yeah, I would say, you know, this is not including warm-up or anything like that, but not, I would say you get, maybe get a maximum of eight, you see it's more like six, seven, actually heavy, hard sets, like working sets, and then, you know, and that's split up between two or three different exercises, but yeah, it's never more than nine, let's say, like three sets on three different exercises. Yeah, the only time that's really violated is when we're doing super, super low set. Volume of, like, singles. Like, you can do 10 singles at, like, an 8 out of 10 explosively, and that's, like, an advanced type thing. So, like, that doesn't really count, because that's more thinking about explosivity and whatnot. For most cyclists, that is not usually that necessary. So, you know, because I used to do this, too, and I think I used to program this for you, where it would be, like, squat. Single Leg Press, Deadlift, and then like two or three other things that like, yeah, like hip hinges, et cetera, et cetera. And it was like, it's like, this is getting ridiculous. I remember once I spent like, I had something set, I thought I had two hours, it took me like over three. And I'm like, I got stuff to do. I can't spend this much time in the gym. And at a certain point, like, if you're lifting heavy enough, Your stabilizing muscles get exhausted. Like, at this point, if I do like, like right now, I usually start about four heavy sets, like when I get into strength training, and that's how I program it for most people. And then right now I'm doing like seven. And after seven, if I try to do something like bent over rows, like with a barbell, it's not that effective because my back is all like, I don't want to hold this up anymore. Totally. Yeah, so that's when I'm like, all right, I'm going to do some single arm rows with a kettlebell. That's where I go instead, as opposed to bending over and rowing 135 from the floor. My back is just not happy about it. So that's one of the things that will increase your injury risk, too, is doing too many things in a session. Yeah, and I think this is a major reason, if people ever wonder, why do bodybuilders machines and isolation exercises, this is a big reason why. You can focus on the muscle that you want to focus on, and you don't have to worry about your back or your grip or your arms being the limiter for your rowing or your, you know, some stronger set of muscles. And, like, you think about, like, a leg press or a hack squat versus a barbell squat. Like, those have a fixed... Path, and so you don't have to worry about stabilization as much as you would with a free weight barbell back squat, for example. Yeah, so like Smith machine, hack squat, machine, belt squat, all this kind of stuff can help a lot, because in strength training parlance, it's called removing the axial component. It's like taking your back and shoulders out of the equation. Yeah. And I think this kind of feeds into sort of another mistake that people make, and that's... You know, going the other way, it's like borrowing like a bodybuilding or like, you know, I don't know, whatever men's fitness told me is going to be a good, hopefully people aren't doing that. Yeah, don't follow men's fitness advice, please. Or honestly, probably what's more common is, oh, in high school, I played this sport and this is what we did and this is what I remember doing and honestly, like, first of all, your high school strength coaches probably weren't awesome. And secondly, that is probably information from, we'll generously say, 10 years ago. But that information that they were using is probably from 20 years before that. Yeah, like who knows? So even though it might be what you remember and what, oh, I remember doing this, this, and this, and I remember working well back then, but like when you're in high school, Working Out, like, you do almost anything, and you just get better. So who knows? Who knows if what you were doing in high school, even as remotely effective. Yeah, God, I miss being that young. And that's absolutely right. It's like, if you are taking what you did, and that's a thing that we can talk about in terms of, like, even regular cycling programming, is if you are, if the plan that you had, like, you know, when you first got on the bike, you're like, man, I got so fit. in my first year on the bike. I want to go back to that plan. Odds are it's not going to work because it may not have been the best plan, but it's because you are in your first year of focused training and doing just about anything that's not too fucked up is going to make you better. Eating donuts on the couch, making me faster. Yeah. Yeah. Resting is where all the gains are made, right? So it's all in the donuts. I'm super tapered now. Yeah. But yeah, I think One of the other things that, you know, you talk about lifting in the gym and it's, I think sometimes people are afraid of using other equipment, like using a belt or using straps or using weightlifting shoes or, you know, at least like harder, like flat sole shoes. They think like, oh, like, you know, I'm not that serious. I'm not that, not that strong. Like, I don't, I don't need these things. And you're like, kind of, but all of the things I just said can make your lifting Better and or safer and or more effective. And even if you just use them a handful of times, you know, they're going to last a while. It's not like they go bad. It's like, oh no, my weightlifting straps are molding or something. And if you're doing like heavy trap bar deadlifts, like sure, the purists will be like, oh, you need to work on your grip strength. You're like, cool, I probably do. But in the meantime, there's nothing wrong with using straps. If I'm, you know, deadlifting, trap bar deadlifting 300 pounds and I can't hold that for a set of 10, well, Sure, use straps, who cares? Yeah, definitely. Yeah, there's no, you shouldn't have an ego about this kind of stuff. I think, and I think that actually goes into the next couple things that I have on my list, which is rep ranges that are too high or too low. So too high, like a rep range that's too high, because, you know, basically, what are you trying to do? So for most people, I usually, especially when they get in there, I'll program sets of anywhere from like, 8 to 15, maybe up to 20. And part of the reason for that is because I want people working on the technique more. So the more reps you do, the more practice you get at doing things that are going to matter. It's like if you are doing sets of, let's say, 7 or 8, and you do this for... You know, you do like a couple sets twice a week and you do this for, I don't know, three or four weeks to kind of get used to it. If you are doing twice the amount of reps, you have now doubled the practice that you get at that technique. And it sounds like not much for one session, but over the course of a couple weeks, it can hugely impact the technique and the mind-muscle connection that you have when you are actually lifting. And so when I see people going, oh, I need this to look just like riding a bike, ride a fucking bike. Don't go in there and do 100 reps of leg press, like a quarter press. Like, why would you do that? Just get on your goddamn bike. Sorry, I've seen so many people do this and it pisses me off. Oh, totally, yeah. Rep range is too low is also the same thing where like you get in and you're like, I'm going to start with sets of like three. at like 90% Walmart max. It's like, okay, first of all, you don't know what 90% looks like. You haven't even tested your max. And second, if you haven't really done any heavy stuff in the last couple months, this is almost a guarantee to injure something. So also don't do this. So you've got like build yourself up is what I'm trying to say. Yeah. I'll have a mildly relevant example. I went to the gym for the first time in a couple months on Monday, and previously, whatever, this last year, I was able to one rep max on the squat, like 475. I think had I actually stopped at some point and rested for a few days and tried to take a run at like 485 or something like that, probably could have done it, but I'd done 475 a couple times. On Monday, when I went to the gym, I warmed up on squat, I did the bar, 135, 225, and I ended up doing just three sets of five. at 315. And I have previously done 315 for 20, 22 reps or something like that. So like, we're talking like a significant distance away. And it was like, this is where I'm stopping. Like, first of all, I want to be able to sit down tomorrow and I just fall over. And secondly, like, I haven't done this in a while. You know, so you're talking like, Peak, like, so normally, right, people think, sets of five, you're sort of in the 80-ish percent, one rep max range, and I was probably down into the, like, you know, 60-ish percentage, just because it's your first time back in a while, and so, you know, you gotta dial it back when you first get, even if you're excited to go in the gym, you gotta dial it back the first couple weeks. Yeah, and actually, that gets to something, because you were just talking about 60%. That's something that experienced lifters can tell by feel. Like you didn't get in there and you were like, day one, one rep max squat, let's go. Like you're not doing that. Nobody should be doing that. And the people who do, well, they're just, they're setting themselves up to meet new people like nurses and doctors. So don't, especially for cyclists and if you're not a very experienced strength athlete, I don't want anybody testing one rep max. And even if you are, like the only one rep max I've ever given Kyle is a trap bar deadlift because the worst that happens is you don't break it off the ground or you don't like bring it up to lockout. And at worst, you drop it and it's next to your feet. But if you're like squatting and you're not used to getting down there, let's say you don't even have safety pins up, like you can legitimately die from failing a squat. And that's the last thing I want to happen to anybody. Totally. Yeah, yeah. No, I agree. Like, you know, there are other ways to measure progress. You know, even though it's cool to post, like, one rep max videos and stuff like that, everyone loves Instagram clicks. Who doesn't? Yeah, there are safer ways. Yeah. And I would say don't even test your one rep max, like... pretty much ever. Working with reps in reserve or RPE is a much more effective way to go about your strength training. It's like if you can successfully do the same reps and it feels easier, this is the same as doing more time and zone for FTP. If you can do more reps and it feels easier, or it feels the same with more reps, or you can do the same reps and it feels easier, it's... That's improvement. You don't need to really test some things if you've got, okay, well, this thing says I should be blah, blah, blah. Yeah, you're right about that. Don't overthink it. Yeah. The, oh, sorry, what? Oh, no, I mean, there are plenty of, like, even other, you know, other sports and things like that where, yeah, it's like, you know, it's fun to watch, like, football players and people like that. you know, do one rep maxes, they post things in the gym, but like, for example, you, you even get, you even find this with super heavyweight and heavyweight, like the sort of Olympic weightlifters who are, you know, significantly greater than 200 pounds bodyweight, a lot of them don't even, yeah, Lasha, don't even test one rep max squats because it's, it's not worth, even though their sport is literally who can lift the heaviest, you know, heaviest weight once, they don't even test one rep max squats because There, as long as they're strong, as long as they can squat more than they are cleaning, and as long as their squat continues to go up, like, it's not worth it. Like, if you're Lasha, your one rep max squat is 800, 850, maybe more? That's probably a front squat. Yeah, like, you, it's just not worth the risk. It's just not worth the injury risk, right? Like, oh, he can do sets of five at 300 kilos, so, you know. And he makes it look easy. Dick. I'm convinced his father was an elephant or something like that. Like, he is so, so huge. And it's like, he could, I don't know, he could participate in Strongman and give all the other guys a run for their money, I think. Yeah. Yeah. He's like, he's also, I think, isn't he like close to like the metric ideal? Like he's two meters tall and like 200 kilos or something. Well, I'm not, so... So let's move on to something that doesn't make me feel very small and weak. Okay, another big mistake people make is lifting too many days per week. And this could even be one day per week, depending on where you are in season. So how do we quantify too many days per week? This is where we have to start thinking about periodizing. Your Training. So if you are early season, like if you just got off the bike, you finished your season up, but you're motivated to keep doing something and you want to get into the gym, I've actually never seen people getting into the gym right after they end their season really impact their aerobic recovery. And a lot of the time it really speeds up the enjoyment of like, oh, I like to get out of the house, I like to go to the gym, I'm meeting new folks, I'm learning new things. It's a nice break for a lot of folks. And so when it's nice like that, a lot of people want to go three times a week, four times a week. I've heard of five times a week. And unless you are doing like a pro bodybuilding or powerlifting, like, you know, proper split of your exercises, if you're doing that all on legs, Well, please don't. That's going to be very painful and you're not going to recover very well. It's the same thing as doing like high intensity efforts five days in a row or five days a week. It's too much. You're not going to recover well. Injury risk goes up, et cetera, et cetera. So I typically would suggest one to two days a week for most people. Three, especially once the... Intensity on the bike starts to ramp up, and this is where the periodizing is going to help you out, because if you are periodizing right, and you've got your training phases accurately set to, you know, for your season, those training phases are going to tell you what is your bigger priority. Is it strength training? Is it volume on the bike? Is it intensity on the bike? And they all have their own ways of affecting the others, and especially Given the individual's response to that kind of stuff, if you are trying to start doing FTP work and VO2s and you are lifting three days a week, something is going to break. And it might just be your spirit. It might be your body. I don't know. It's probably too much. I'm going to recommend doing the Rich Piana 8-Hour Arm Workouts every day. Oh my god. For those of you unaware, just google Rich Piana 8-Hour Arms. Piana is spelled like piano, but with an A instead of an O. R.I.P. R.I.P. Rich. Don't do drugs, kids. I think one of the things you said, though, is like, I think also maybe a fairly common mistake is people thinking, oh, I'm going to do all legs. Like, I don't have to work. I don't need my arms or my core, back, shoulders, whatever, for cycling. So I'm just going to do only legs. Only legs all the time. And you're like, eh, like, this is your one opportunity or, you know, not one opportunity, but this is a good opportunity to actually get in some sort of, you know, other. Modalities of Exercise, and obviously you don't have to go super heavy on bench press or whatever, but just hammering legs over and over and over again may actually be a little refreshing if you throw in some upper body work. You're not going to end up unintentionally looking like Peak Arnold or walking out for the Olympia. Yeah, you're not going to look like Rich Piana. Yeah, exactly. Throwing in even... Even one upper body day a week isn't going to kill you, and it's probably actually good for your long-term health. Sometimes I wonder, you see pro climbers, and you're like, how do they put suitcases into overhead bins on an airplane? I don't think some of them could. It's probably good for you long-term, actually, if you can put your suitcase in your overhead bin by yourself and not ask the flight attendants for help. Yeah, unless you're running a tour to France and discovering why God made checked baggage, you are definitely going to be, yeah, like having some functional fitness helps, like being able to get older with your shoulders working right. Like a lot of people think that strength training is going to impact your joints in a negative way, and in fact, According to some people who know these kinds of things, people who lift weights have healthier joints as they age than people who don't, and bones and tendons and muscles and everything else. So as long as you're doing it right, it's going to be fine. It's like if you are lifting wrong, and this is why the first thing we talked about is... Technique and Making Sure That That's All Squared Away. If your technique is good, you're going to be fine. As long as you don't, and you know, if your eyes aren't bigger than your muscles and tendons can handle, then you're also going to be fine. And actually that, speaking of periodization, that brings me to the next thing I've got on my list, which is staying in the gym too long in season or staying too heavy in season. Like these are Big, big, big no-nos for a lot of people. Like, especially if you're a regular road cyclist and you are, like, let's say you're getting into race prep, especially, and you're like, man, I just want to keep in my one day a week of training hard in the gym. Like, you can do that if it's not impacting you on the bike. And that's where a little give and take is going to help a lot because you are not a weightlifter. Nobody is going to give you points for, you know, in the premium competition. for being able to squat more than all the other sprinters. You don't get that. We're going to seed a match sprint tournament by one rep max squats. Oh, God. Yeah, you would seed pretty high, Kyle. Yeah, and so that's the kind of thing where a little auto-regulation matters a lot, because if you are having shit bike workouts, Like, if you're in the gym, like, let's say twice, and you're staying in the gym for way, way, way too long, every one of your bike workouts is going to be impacted, and not only that, the bike workouts are going to impact your recovery from the strength workouts, and so everything is going to suffer. And this happens even before we run into the interference effect. So from a very practical standpoint, pick your master. It's too much. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. And even though some people may take the approach of, oh, I just need to sleep better, eat more, things like that, like, even if that is the case, like, you know, most of us are people with other commitments in our lives, and we can't just be like, yeah, I should go to work today, but I'm just gonna sleep extra today to make up for me doing too much volume. Or thinking that other things are going to help you. Like, oh man, if I just supplement creatine, I'll be able to do it all. No, no, creatine's not going to help. Creatine gets you maybe like a 5% benefit in session. It really doesn't give you much. What if I do contrast baths and have $1,000 squeezy pants? Yeah, probably better to spend that money on somebody who can help you program all this stuff, honestly. So, yeah, so watching how all that kind of stuff affects you is hugely important. And so that's why next on my list is watching your recovery. So having I don't know what's a better way to say this, but having KPIs, performance indicators that are black and white, you did it or you didn't. Did you add a rep or add some weight for the same as you did last week? Great, you're getting better. If you did not, you are not getting better. If you do three sets of eight at, let's say, 135 pounds. For folks who are not gym familiar, that's like a bar plus two 45-pound plates for about 60 kilos. So if you do like three sets of eight this week, and then next week you do eight, eight, and then six before you have to rack and you're cooked, you did less reps. This is the same thing as doing a three by 20. Whereas previous week, you go 4x15, okay, doing good at FTP. Next week, I do 3x20, I do two 20-minute efforts, and then I do 10 minutes into my last rep, and then my legs are failing. Blow up and die. Yeah. That is a black and white, I am not improving, I am fatiguing, I need to rest or I need to adjust something. Yeah. And some of it could be just like we've said before with... adding time and zone or adding more reps. You may have to progress slower. There's nothing wrong with that. You would rather progress slower than not at all. Yeah. And once in a while, it's actually because you are not working hard enough. Not often. Most cyclists are pretty highly self-motivated, and we've got to hold you all back, including... Including me and Kyle, we have to hold ourselves back. I've got to hold myself back and Kyle back and everybody else. And Kyle occasionally, I'll be like, hey, Kyle, I'm doing this. And he's like, why? So Kyle could hold me back. But yeah, you've got to, every once in a while, it's like if you're doing four sets, like two sets of squats and two sets of like single leg press or something like that, You know, you work that for a couple weeks, and you're gaining, gaining, gaining, and then you take a rest, you deload, and then you go back, and you're like, man, I should be stronger, and you gain for one more week, and then it just taps out. Try adding another set. It's like, you know, if you are, it's sort of like if you're always doing 2x20 at FTP. It's like at a certain point, you probably want to do more time. Totally. So, my next thing in terms of that, which hugely affects your recovery, is not eating enough after your gym sessions. So, post-gym session, I typically get about 40 grams, 40 to 50 grams of protein, and about 100 grams of carbohydrates. And I increase my carbohydrate consumption on those days by maybe another 50 to 100 grams. And that's just like a regular Day with nothing else but a strength workout. Like if I've got something on the bike too, well, I'm going to increase it by quite a bit more than that. And so, you know, if you look at the actual kilojoules that you spend lifting, like if people have a bar tracker or something like that, like Kyle and I use, you will see that the actual kilojoules based on, you know, the accelerometer, estimating how far you're moving and speed and all that kind of stuff, like It's like a couple hundred kilojoules. It's really not a lot. Yeah. Like one or two hundred maybe. So you've got to make sure that you're eating enough. And especially if you are groggy and like staying sore way longer than normal, these are other signs that you are kind of screwed. And so like if you are, here's a for instance, if you lift heavy on like Monday, and you take it easy Tuesday, Wednesday and then Thursday you've got a hard bike session and normally that's fine and you're not fine on Thursday sometimes you've just got to eat more because normally that should be enough to recover yeah I think the other thing is too is thinking that oh like it's like you said it's just it's just gym workouts like if I'm trying to lose a little like say you're it's off season and you know god forbid you're trying to do like three things at once like be in the gym do base miles and also like lose some weight you you may be thinking oh it's not that much I don't have to fuel up that much but like you basically burn only glycogen lifting weights and so if you're depleted like you're mentally gonna feel like halfway to bonking like warming up and you're just like oh man this really sucks and I've been there I've been there too like you you're busy you have life stuff you didn't eat that well that day but then you know what you like Have like a can of Coke and like a cookie or something. Even at the gym, it's fine. Been there. Yeah, you like pop out in the coffin like the Undertaker. Yeah, and you feel a lot better. Like, I think, yeah, treating it as seriously nutrition-wise as you would with a bike workout is a good rule of thumb. Yeah. And along with recovery, the big thing that, another mistake I see a lot of people making is not adjusting where your strength sessions occur. Because in our listener questions, and we got like 50, 60, something like that, like we got a lot. And a good amount for us is normally like 15, 20. So a lot of people want to know about strength training. And the most common question everybody asked is, when is the best time to put our strength training sessions relative to our bike sessions? The answer is, drum roll, it depends. Sorry. Sorry. I know. So it depends. We did an entire episode on this once, which is that it depends because I think a lot of things need to get individualized. We can give you a recommendation, but if you don't adjust it based on what works for you personally, based on your personal constraints and how fast you recover, how well you're eating, your life stress, all that kind of stuff, if you're not adjusting based on all those factors, and you just go with like a cookie cutter, oh, I'm going to do this here because, and then everything sucks, well, then you've got to change it. You've got to recognize that things are sucking and adjust stuff to reduce or eliminate the suckness. So for instance, if you are doing like strength training in the morning and riding your bike and doing higher intervals in the evening or something like that, because let's say that's just how your schedule works out, where it's like, Okay, I've got to get to the gym in the morning. That's when I can do it the easiest with the least stress. Then I'm going to hit the bike in the afternoon. If your intervals suck in the afternoon, which I expect they would, then try to switch it or don't do those intervals that day. Try to move them to the day before. Try to move them to one or two days after, something like that. And because especially if you are... If your strength training is a priority, sometimes you have to get rid of one of your hard bike sessions just so you can recover from the strength. And there's nothing wrong with that. This is one of those periodization things where what matters to you at that moment and during that training phase? Yeah. Yeah, what's that saying? Is it a Russian proverb? Whatever. If you chase two rabbits, they'll both escape type thing? I've never heard that, but I love it. I swear. I don't want to claim it's weird saying it's a Russian thing, but I think that's right. Let's quick Google. I don't know. Yeah. Hard to find. Lots of sources apparently for this. But anyway. The other Russian proverb, if you try to have two shots of vodka, you'll get drunker faster. Yeah, exactly. But yeah, it's a common thing there. If you're just trying to do too much, like... Yeah, we all wish we could do it all, right? Like, everyone wants, I mean, who wouldn't want to be better at everything all the time? That sounds great. Yeah, I'm doing, I'm doing, yeah, I'm doing three hard days on the bike, I'm doing 30 hours a week, and I'm also training hard in the gym three times a week, lifting heavy and just, you know, everything's going up. I cannot complain. That doesn't happen. And I've consulted with people who ride that much and try to lift that much, and it goes exactly how you would expect. So, speaking of which, the last thing I've got on my notes here is thinking too much about fiber type. This is a big one. Seriously, the number of people who come to me and say, I want to lift, but I'm worried about having too many Type II fibers and being too reliant on carbohydrates to have good endurance. And here's the secret about that. It's that, yes, fiber types can shift. They take a long time to shift. And if you are riding enough, it's basically not going to happen. Yeah. And also, I think, sort of going the other way, you're not going to be lifting. You're not going to go and start doing 70 weeks straight of lifting. Like, this is, it's kind of, it's similar, it's a similar vein to like, oh, I'm worried I'm going to like, end up looking like, you know, frigging Ronald or whatever. Yeah, Ronnie Coleman, like. Accidentally. Like, no, no, no. You got to work at that for a long time. Yeah. It's not like Popeye's the spinach and his biceps grow to fill heat size. It's not going to happen. Here's the thing. I've also had people I've consulted with and I've got clients on my roster right now who say stuff like, yeah, I build muscle really, really fast when I start getting into the gym. And technically, that's true. And it's also... Technically, not true. So, what's happening is, when you get into the gym, you are starting to use motor units that are much larger than you normally recruit on the bike, and especially in your shoulders, your back, your arms, even just holding up weights, this can have an effect. And for instance, if you're doing Olympic lifts, I've got a couple clients who are experienced at that, and I let them do Olympic lifts. If they're doing that, a lot of the time, their traps get bigger. Their lats get bigger. Like the stuff that gets yanked down when you catch the bar in a hang position, that kind of stuff tends to affect all that kind of stuff. And especially if you've had a couple weeks off before you get into the gym, your body is seeing fit to not store any glycogen. Because why would it? You have not told it you need to store glycogen because you're exercising frequently and these storage would be helpful. So when you start lifting, You start storing a lot of glycogen and a lot of water weight that comes along with the glycogen in larger motor units than normal. And typically, this means, well, the dirty secret, I've probably said this on the podcast before, the dirty secret of muscle hypertrophy studies is that anything that makes your muscle cells swell is considered hypertrophy, including glycogen storage in water. If you consume creatine, like if you're taking five grams a day for... Two, Three, Four Weeks, your muscles are going to be, you know, you're going to increase the amount of creatine you store in your muscles, and this comes with water weight, and so, therefore, it is technically not incorrect, even though it's kind of also incorrect, to say that creatine causes muscle hypertrophy, or riding. While a lot of very slim people start riding, and their muscles get a little bigger from water weight, that's hypertrophy right there. Like, you don't have to Be too concerned about blowing up like a balloon when you start getting into the gym. Because that's, it's just all, it's all water weight. And then it'll stop at a certain point, but you've got to be ready to account for it, especially if you're going to lift while you're on a diet. I've learned this the hard way. If you start lifting while you also start a caloric deficit, your weight's going to maintain for like two or three weeks. Even though you're tired and groggy and all the other signs that you are in a caloric deficit, and you're like, man, what the fuck is happening? You know what's happening is you're gaining all that glycogen storage from the noob gains and lifting, but you are also in a deficit, so you're groggy and grumpy, and you cannot really... Do that at the same time, or if you do, you're not going to see the pounds coming off or the kilos coming off for a little while. So I usually recommend starting to strength train for two to three weeks or about four to six sessions before you actually start a diet if you're going to do that. So any other thoughts before we get to listener questions? I would say Also, it's a good time to, like, honestly, riding your bike with friends, like, it's hard to do intervals, like, good intervals, and also... you know have some social time in between there because usually you're gassed or you're tired or whatever you're just you're riding at slightly different paces like if anyone's ever tried to do you know five by fives with their friends up a hill like you're all gonna go slightly different paces and it's really not that fun but gym work is actually a time when you can meet up with your buddies and you can do very similar work You can obviously change the weights in between, and you have someone to spot you, or help you, or give you technique reviews, and things like that, like, in real time, and that can be kind of refreshing, because riding your bike, yeah, we go on group rides, coffee rides, things like that, but, like, it can be reasonably isolating for a lot of people, especially if you're just sick of staring at the wall, riding the trainer, because you live somewhere where it snows around now, like, it maybe actually is a good thing, you can meet up with some friends, you can show up, you have some accountability, you know. So maybe think about that too. Yeah, for sure. That's a good way to think about it. Yeah, and I would say I want to  I can round out with don't big brain the strength training stuff. Like really don't big brain it because like if you're thinking about fiber type or you're thinking about VLA max, there's a question on that we'll get to. Don't worry. I keep thinking that we've debunked VLA Max sufficiently that nobody's going to ask about it, but they still do, because, well, not everybody's heard every episode of the back catalog, I guess, which is okay. We'll address it anyway. Shame on that. Yeah. But it's like, oh, if you work in this rep range, you're going to cause, like, Type I fiber hypertrophy, and if you work in this range, you're going to cause Type II fiber hypertrophy, and what do you want more? You're going to have too much fiber conversion. Just, just, just, just, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, shh, Even though we got quite a few more, there was a lot of overlap. And there were a lot of questions where if we don't answer your question, email me, empiricalcyclingatgmail.com, and we can consult because your question is either too specific to you or it's too general to really have a good recommendation. And you're just going to get hit with an it depends. So for individual stuff, we're going to talk about what it depends on. So if we don't get to your question, my apologies. We also don't want to have a four-hour episode. So, first question. Should you do every lift explosively? I would say it depends. Oh, God. All right. I'll field this one. For the general purpose of cyclists, absolutely not. That's... A very sprinter-specific type of thing that we will get into later in a sprinter's programming. But for the most part, what I want to see in a cyclist's lifts, especially more complicated movements like squats, for instance. It's not, you know, it's deadlifts. They're not terribly complicated movements, but there's a lot of ways, because you're using your entire kinetic chain, there's a lot of ways that you can screw it up. And so I want to see people lifting a very controlled eccentric. So the lowering phase has to be slow and controlled. Like do not bomb into the hole of a squat ever. Oh, everyone loves a dive bomb squat. Yeah, the dive bomb squat's nice because what happens is you're using the stretch shortening cycle of your muscles to bounce out of the bottom. So we have like basically what are considered elastic components either in series or parallel. and when you get to the bottom, you are going spring out of the bottom and it helps you like get through the sticking point because it gets you some momentum. Terrible idea. Don't do that, especially for cyclists, especially if you are newer to strength training. That is a great way to hurt yourself or feel like you've got a lot more strength than you do. So control it, especially if you feel like When you get to the bottom and you get to that sticking point, you think, oh, I've got to turn on this muscle group now. Like, oh, I need more quads. Oh, I need more glutes. That is a terrible way to go about it. Like, you should be engaged with your quads and glutes and everything on the way down. So that way, on the way back up, you don't go, oh, I need more of this. So, Kyle, I'm sure you can relate to this quite a bit because as you get back into the gym after several months of ballooning, you know, I'm sure you were like, man, I got, I gotta relearn this technique a little bit. Yeah, for sure. And like, you're just not used to the, all the little things that you feel when you're, you're like, you know, you warm up, you do this, that, but you're still like, it's, it's never, it's not exactly the same. No, no amount of warmup can re-prepare you for this, you know, other than just like getting back into it slowly and, you know, accepting that you're gonna be more sore with less weight and that's fine. Yeah. Next listener question, does adding muscle mass to the main pedal pushers lead to a higher FTP? No. Next question. No, sorry. Let's dig into this a little bit. If only. Yeah, if only, Kyle and I would have like 450 watt FTPs. And yet, I can outlift Cory with his 450 watt FTP by quite a wide margin. And my FTP is like... Less than half of his. Also because I don't train it. And that's one of the things is that your FTP is not limited for most people. It's not limited unless you are old and infirm and you can barely get out of your chair, in which case, yes, it is definitely limited by how much strength you have. Or even if you're young and infirm. Sorry if that's the case. You should probably not listen to this podcast. You should probably go to your PT session right now. If you are... If you're lifting in order to increase your FTP, you are literally doing it wrong. This is a big brain thing here. It's like, oh, if I can just push more force. Everybody can push more force in their FTP. That's why you could do VO2 max efforts. That's why you can sprint. It's not a limiter how much force you can produce. And you're also so far away. Those charts that you use, if you enter in how many reps you can do at a certain weight, it will estimate your... 5-Rep Max, your 1-Rep Max, your 3-Rep Max, whatever. Yeah. Those charts stop working at, like, 10, 12 reps? Like, FTP is your 1,000-Rep Max? Like, it's not even close. Right? Like, 40 minutes at 90 RPM. The limitation is metabolic. Right. Yeah, like it's not like, oh, it's not like, oh, if I increase my one rep max and therefore my thousand rep max is like now a slightly lower component of my one rep. No, it doesn't work like that. It's like the limitation is aerobic. It's not forced production. So yeah, you're not going to add more FTP watts by Getting Into the Gym. Now, we talked about this a little bit in a very, very early podcast, where it was like, what's that number nine or something like that? I think it was called Strength Endurance and the Size Principle, if I'm not mistaken. So we probably, if I'm not mistaken, which means, I'm hedging, I've said not mistaken twice now, which means I might be. I think we looked at a study where people did strength training and looked at their 20-minute power test. and VO2 Max. And the VO2 Max did not go up. 20-minute power went up. But if your VO2 Max is not going up, odds are your FTP is not going up, unless you are doing a fuckload of volume. So, yeah, so that's, it's because that was one of the things is like I was trying to illustrate or the study illustrated that you are increasing your neural drive, you're increasing your capability of recruiting larger motor units, but that's really where that stops. So yeah, no FTP for getting stronger. Next question, should you prioritize a hypertrophy phase before a strength phase? Yes. Unless you are really lifting consistently, Year-Round, which most cyclists I do not believe should be, unless you are a sprint cyclist, in which case you should be. So I think so because higher volume, and so you get more practice with your reps and your exercises. And also, it actually, it sets you up really well. So I know a lot of people are all about the starting strength, where you start with 3x5 and you... You just ride that out. And most cyclists can ride that out for a couple weeks. Yeah, a while, like maybe even two months or so before it starts to tap out. And by that point, you've got to start prioritizing the bike instead. And so it's time to start rotating out the strength stuff. So that can be a thing, but I would prefer somebody do more reps. at lower weights, because we're going to get about the same benefits, and I would rather keep the weights lower and keep the injury risk lower. I would also say, this is purely anecdotal, but I think you'll find also, say you have a bad back, say you have a bad, you know, whatever, some injuries that are, they're sort of chronic and a little persistent, they come and go a little bit, like, doing a little bit of extra hypertrophy work, and obviously you're not going to put on 10 pounds of muscle or something insane. But first of all, the higher reps, you're going to get more blood flow to those areas. And secondly, a little bit more muscle, if you have a dodgy back or something, it's probably not the worst thing in the world. You want the muscles to take the load anyway and not connective tissues and things like that. Yeah, having a little bit more muscle and even being able to turn those muscles on just by You getting better at using them through, like you said, more repetitions is probably not the worst thing in the world. Especially if it's something like, oh yeah, like, you know, every once in a while I tweak my back, blah, blah, blah, but oh yeah, you know, if you, maybe if you did a little bit more consistent. Back Work, maybe it goes away, or it's alleviated slightly. Like, you know, there are a host of reasons why this could be true, but it's something to consider. Yeah, and ask your doctor if you are in that situation about exercises that are okay or not okay. And yeah, clear it all with them. Just to make sure that you're not gonna go try to big brain your PT and re-injure yourself. Don't do that. Is a hypertrophy phase necessary if you're looking to gain strength but not size? I would recommend still doing it mostly as an adaptation phase. Yeah. And that's really going to be about it. More practice with the technique is going to be better for you. Even if you shorten it to like three-ish weeks, I definitely recommend it for sure. Before you get into stuff that would be... Ways to Increase Your Strength Without Increasing Your Size, and that is a whole separate podcast, which I will add to our very, very, very, very long list of podcast ideas. I would say, too, like, if you're worried about it, like, the first couple weeks getting back into lifting, you're not going to be, it's not going to be, it's going to be like redoing noob gains all over again, so spending a couple weeks doing lower Weights, Higher Reps, it's probably fine. And it's not like that if you are worried about getting too big or whatever, you're not going to appreciably gain slabs of muscle in three weeks unless you're doing some secret Soviet sports supplements or something. It's just nothing to worry about. I love that you call it slabs of muscle like it's a steak. I just want to have huge, you know, like lats. What is that on a cow? I forget. You can always look it up. I have no idea. You ever do that? Like compare what cut of beef it is compared to like what that muscle is actually called? No? Just me? Okay. Nope. Just you. All right. Next question. Is strength limited by muscle mass at a certain point? Yes. As a matter of fact, it is limited at many points by muscle mass. Have you seen Harry LeBrasen's quads? So here's the weird thing. It's like, you know, if you look at like Corey Williams, he's got skinny little legs compared to me. And we can do roughly the same max power. So there's more to generating force and also generating force rapidly than just muscle size. And so that makes sprinting a very complicated question. It's more than just... Get Bigger, Get More Watts. It doesn't always happen with everybody. So the thing is, with muscle mass, all the exercise physiology 101 stuff says that for an identical cross-sectional muscle mass for anybody, regardless of height, muscle length, or gender, they are going to produce the same force. And this is only true If you disconnect that muscle from the person. Because once you attach the muscle to the bones, where it attaches to the bones has a huge effect on the effectiveness of the lever length. So like if you are doing a bicep curl and your bicep attaches really close to your elbow, you don't have as much leverage as if the bicep attaches halfway to your hand. Yeah, totally. The other thing is, that's also completely ignoring, like, neural drive, like, some people are just better at that than others, and so, you know, you see some of these, like, pretty slender, like, elite track sprinters, and you're like, oh my god, how are they doing that power at, like, you know, weighing 10 pounds, 20 pounds less than me, and you're just like, oh, they're just like, they can take all of their muscle mass and use it all now, like, right now, like, faster than you can, you know, you can. Yeah, and I remember I was talking to somebody a while ago who said that he was doing an isometric mid-thigh pull, which is a pretty standardized lab test for strength, where you grab a bar that cannot move, but it's going to measure how much force you can generate by pulling the bar up. And so you use your shoulders, your back, your legs, your quad, everything in your body. And he could... create the same force as another guy in that program who could, you know, they were generating like 3,000 Newtons or something like that, whatever the number was. And his rate of force development is what it's called. How fast you get to your peak force was like three or four times as long as the guy, or more, as the guy who could just go, boop, right to max. And that's... That's a big difference in a lot of different folks. It's like, I've got a higher rate of force development naturally than Kyle does, but Kyle can outlift the shit out of me. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. No, I mean, I think, you know, a classic example is like Jason Kenney, right? Like, oh, yeah. One of the most successful track sprinters of all time. Dude only weighed like 180, 190 pounds in his prime. Like, I've seen him in person. Like, he's not very big, but he could do, you know, 2400 watts, whenever he wanted, right now, doesn't matter. On a gear smaller than most people would be comfortable pushing, too. Yeah. And so, yeah, like, and like, I remember somebody speculating that he would have been great in like the 90s and early 2000s when everybody was on like 96 gear inches instead of like 120 plus. And I think that they're absolutely right, because, I mean, you watch that dude, like when he's come around the last corner. and they're at like 140 RPM. He is just accelerating continuously where other people are kind of tapped out on how much force they can produce. And the faster you've got the rate of force development, the faster the cadence where you can generate effective power. And so we could talk about this all day. We'll do another episode on this. Someday, I know we've got three people asking for a track sprinting episode. One day, we'll get to it. Next question, if the goal is to increase muscle mass, what kind of caloric surplus should I run? So typically for like bodybuilding, you're usually looking to gain like a half a pound to a pound per week. It's actually about the same rate as fat loss, optimal fat loss. So I would say, especially if you're just doing legs, you want to cut that in half. So I would say you want to increase your daily caloric surplus by about 250 to 500 calories, something like that. But I would, especially if you're slim, you are actually less in danger of putting on a ton of fat than if you are already kind of fat. And so like, I would say the, if you're like under 10, 12% body fat, you could probably get away with a little more and not gain quite as much fat, but that's the detriment of Doing a proper hypertrophy phase and really looking to gain mass is that the calories in your bloodstream are available to all of your tissue equally, which is why nutrient timing kind of helps, making sure that you get more carbs in your collection windows and things like that. That matters, but yeah, it's like at all other times, it's as available to your fat tissue as it is to your muscle tissue. And so running a surplus, that is something to watch for. But generally speaking, for most people, yeah, I would say like 250 calories a day is approximately what I would recommend for a surplus, especially on your lifting day and the day after. Sound about right? Yeah. Yep. Cool. How can we account for the interference effect? Oh, we kind of answered this already, where I mentioned that in my experience coaching and lifting and training, you run into more practical fatigue-related issues before you actually properly run into the interference effect. So I don't worry about that too much. If you think about it in terms of making sure that you are recovering properly from all of your hard stuff, that'll take care of itself, so I wouldn't worry too much about it. 

Next question. Type I fiber hypertrophy in the gym or bike only? Love a good big brain question. Kyle, what do you think on this one? I mean, generally, type I fibers aren't the ones you want to do that are prone to hypertrophy anyway, but on the bike, I just Are you, do you have one of those like VeloBike 100 tooth like chain rings and you're doing like, you're doing, you know, standing 200 meter sprints on like 111 as a gear or something? I don't know how you would get any meaningful hypertrophy other than like what you said, just to, you know, gaining a little bit of glycogen, gaining a little bit of water from resuming activity on the bike. Yeah. And here's the thing, when you are building new muscle mass, Typically, you are building new muscle fibers, which come from satellite cells, yada, yadas. We don't have to go too far into that stuff. But yeah, Type I fiber hypertrophy, you're probably not adding too many more new contractile units in an existing muscle cell itself. And so it's probably more likely that Type I fiber hypertrophy comes from just being active. and like doing endurance training. And you actually, we kind of discussed this in one of the myths episodes where we discussed how you cannot generate sufficient mechanical tension in the muscles on the bike, ever. Unless you've got a really strange bike and you are doing it in a very specific way, I don't think- Tractor pulls. Huh? Tractor pulls. Oh, God. Yeah, like pulling an actual tractor. Potentially, maybe. Yes, yeah, yeah. Not the, like, big gear thing exercise from, was that training racing with a power meter or cyclist training? I forget, yeah. Yeah. It's one of, yeah. Yeah, so I wouldn't worry about it at all, actually. Okay, next question. How do I evaluate minimum effective dose? 

Well, there's research into some of this, so there's general guidelines out there you can find on the internet for, you know, sets, like number of working sets per week, let's say, to like at least maintain strength. And a lot of them are surprisingly low. Like you can get away with like, you know, keeping what you have is far easier than... getting there in the first place. Yeah. But I would say you certainly have to do it, you have to do that muscle group at least once a week. You probably don't have to go crazy, like it's probably, probably what, what did you get? It's probably half of what it took, half of the volume and intensity it took to like get there is probably enough to... Yeah, that is actually about what I see is like if you're working sets, well, this is for maintenance, let's say. So for maintenance, if your normal working sets was like six and that was, sorry, yeah. So if your normal working sets while you were getting stronger or bigger were like six sets on the legs, like three sets of squats and three sets of single leg press, something like that. If you are then trying to maintain, I would say like You know, like two sets of 10 at like a 5 out of 10 RPE, maybe a 4 are enough to maintain, plus like a set of single leg press at the same RPE. You don't need much. You really don't. But one of the things about maintaining is that a lot of it's neurological. It's just having, like, because when you get out of the gym for a couple months, you get back in, you go, oh, I've lost all my strength. And then you really quickly regain a lot of the weight on the bar that you had been working with earlier, like several months ago, you haven't really lost that strength. You've just lost the ability to do the motion. So that's part of what maintenance is. But for a minimum effective dose of gaining size or strength, you really just need to make sure that you are either adding reps or adding a little bit of weight every single time and not letting your ego get out of control. That's really it. You got more or you didn't. That's what I was going to say. It's basically just, it's going to be, like, that, like, one tick higher than what it takes to maintain. You will technically be progressing, right? Like, as long as you're progressing sets, reps, like you said. Like, so, it's actually, you know, and a lot of these studies, too, are also looking at, like, people who are interested in, like, bodybuilding and more, like, say, like, aesthetics and things like that. So, lifting is going to be their only thing. They're not also doing cycling and all this other stuff. You know, take the, some of the studies with a grain of salt there too. Yeah. Yeah, it's, it's, it's still like, yeah, like the, a lot of studies will show that even if you're doing a fairly low amount of volume and intensity, you can still improve, you know, and certainly maintain, certainly do better than maintaining, even if it's slower than optimal or ideal or whatever. Yeah. Okay, next question. Do you have to go heavy to see a benefit in your sprint? No. I mean, I can think of people I've talked to who, you know, they went into the gym and they did three sets of 10, 12 on squats for like two months and saw huge, you know, P-max increases, 20-second power increases. Just at me, bro. Yeah. Dick, no, um, yeah, I, I, like, it would be, you know, and unfortunately, the only way to figure out if you're one of those lucky people who can get away with that is by trying it, but, yeah, plenty of people see, like, yeah, I hit the gym two months out of the year, my power goes up, and then, you know, I, I mean, try to maintain that or have it, hopefully have it decline as little as possible throughout the racing season and then do it again and it works for people, like, yeah, but you wonder, like, Yeah, sorry, go ahead. Oh, no, even like, I remember seeing, was it Andre? I think it was a video interview with Andre Greipel. He was talking about lifting and stuff like that. And even he, you know, he was doing, he could do 18, 1900 watts right in his prime, 2000 watts, something like that. And he was talking, like, he, it sounds like he never really did super intense, like, you know, 1RMs, 3RMs, things like that. Like, he was doing sets of 6, 8, 10, you know, nothing crazy. And obviously, the dude is okay. He's okay at bikes. Yeah, he was all right. Well, that's the thing is, as you get closer to the end of a set, if you are working hard enough, you are going to get that neural drive stimulus of really all hands on deck. I need every motor unit available to complete this lift. And as long as you're getting close enough to failure, You are a quick responder to this kind of stuff, and a lot of people are not, but some people are. I was one of the lucky ones with this, where just that stimulus alone will translate onto the bike really quickly. But I also know this from experience, at a certain point, all that shit goes away, and you are just stuck grinding out week to week like everybody else. Like when my sprint got up to about 1,900 watts, that's when all the fun stuff stopped. And I was like, oh, now I'm like really training training. Like it's, this is no longer easy. I've got to, I've got to really be vigilant on my recovery and my workouts and everything. Um, so yeah. Um, so yeah, I would say early on for most people, you don't have to go heavy, but at a certain point you will probably have to go heavy. Like my best sprint ever was, uh, 2,186 Watts. And I did it the day after my best ever deadlift at like, over 550 pounds. Nice. Yeah. And I am not that strong anymore. I've not been training that consistently for a long time. So that's too bad. Don't get hit by cars, kids. Anyway. Next question. Is it okay to train for only injury prevention? Absolutely. Yes. Yeah. Sounds great. Yeah. I mean, being thoughtful about your training. Imagine, imagine this Eden. I mean, everybody's thoughtful about their training, I think, or most everybody. But yeah, yeah, you could definitely train just for injury prevention. And you're looking for a minimum dose where all those like little aches and pains and niggles on the bike, where all those kind of go away. That's what you're looking for, really. And it should be like, yeah, it should be like you don't even hardly notice it. And then you're like, it's sort of like, You know, when you don't get into a car crash on your drive somewhere, it's like you don't even notice you didn't get into a car crash. You kind of expect it. That's the kind of thing you're looking for. It's not like something horrible happened. You should be like, oh, that was fine. And that's what you look, that's your goal. So yeah, sure. Sorry, did I cut you off at some point on that? Oh, no, no, it's fine. Okay. Yeah, our audio delay still occasionally comes to haunt us. Or somebody's like, I think once I got a comment where like, it always takes a second for you to get my joke. I'm like, no, Kyle gets the joke right away. Kyle's way smarter than I am. It's just like, you're hearing the audio delay. Yeah. All right. Can we ride and lift in the same day? You can do a lot of things. Yeah, I mean, there's nothing wrong with that in principle, provided that you've planned it out and you're not just like, oh, I took a lifting day and I checked on a four-hour endurance ride or vice versa, you know? Yeah. Especially if, like we said before, if you find yourself with a little extra free time, you want to program a little bit of a one, two-week, like, training camp for yourself in base season, that sounds great. Like, there are plenty of ways you could do that well, you know? Yeah. Yeah, and I would say just go back to making sure that making sure of all the tips we mentioned earlier of making sure that you're recovering right, it's not affecting your technique. If you need to lower the weights, that's okay. You're not a weightlifter. You're a cyclist. And making sure it's not affecting you in subsequent days on the bike, et cetera, et cetera. So you could be lifting fairly light in the gym and have it be exactly what you want. to get out of being in the gym without affecting you on the bike. Or if you are like, man, I really just can't lift and ride in the same day, that's okay too, depending on what your goals are. And that's that, just depending on what are your goals. That's the big one. Another one is you can, and track sprinters do this all the time, they'll use like a morning gym session as potentiation for an afternoon sprint workout. So you go into the gym, you hit some lighter, explosive, you know, 70-80% stuff, nothing crazy, no insane volumes, but like, kind of like an opener, so you want to leave feeling good and feeling, you know, capable, like, you know, a little bit of a confidence boost, never hurt anyone before a sprint workout, and then you come back in the afternoon and you slam some, you know, I don't know, 20-second accelerations or something like that. Yeah. That's also an individual thing, too. where like that kind of neural potentiation can be very, very powerful, but it can also not work for some people. So you've really got to make sure that you are doing the right amount of intensity and the right amount of volume for that kind of stuff, which makes it low typically. And so it can be overdone quite quickly and easily. So typically for most people listening to this, that is not a concern you should ever have. Thank you, Kyle, for getting ahead of our track sprinting episode. Yeah, hey, do what I can, do what I can. All right, next question. Should cyclists worry about tendon strength when they start heavy lifting? Yes. As a matter of fact, you really should. And that's why I usually recommend not getting right into the heavy stuff, but starting light and doing more reps will get you the same thing with less injury risk. Otherwise, you are going to potentially... Tear Your Muscle Right Off Your Bone. Don't do that. That sounds terrible. It's a real concern. You can Google. I don't recommend you Google this, but you can Google. Oh, God, no, yeah. I saw on Instagram once some PT place, I don't think it was Squat University, but it may have been, put up a video of somebody who was recording their, like, their sim cells from, like, the mid-thigh down to the floor. So, like, you're looking at somebody. Oh, God. Oh, no. Doing a... I know where this is going. Oh, God. I think they're, like, standing, and then they jump to, like, a split stance to start running. And when their back foot hits the ground, you see their tendon rupture and, like, just jump, like, literally go up their calf like a rubber band that got cut under tension. Oh, yeah. Or you can see people tear a bicep on video. There's stuff like that that can happen, especially typically a lot of these people are on quite a large amount of gear in the bicep stuff, but for the Achilles tendon stuff and the calf stuff, that kind of stuff tends to be more of something is stiffer than the other thing, and that thing... And the stiffer component, whether it's the tendon or the muscle, will rupture the other under very high load like plyometrics. Yeah. Famously, for all you NFL fans out there this year, when Aaron Rodgers tore his Achilles, it was a non-contact tear, and there is a video of that. You can see his sock, like, ripple. Oh, I'm going to pass on that one. As many of those videos as I've seen, I do not want to see a rippling sock. Yeah, no, that's an issue. And actually, Keith Barr, B-A-A-R, is a great resource on this kind of stuff in terms of researching connective tissue and tissue health and stuff like that. And so if you check him out, he will discuss how younger NFL players are always looking to become more explosive, and so they're doing sprints and plyos and cleans and stuff like that, and the older NFL players are all doing heavy, slow lifts like squats and leg press and things like that, because the faster, more explosive stuff will stiffen your tissues, whereas the slower stuff will tend to relax tissues because it's nearly an isometric and all that time under tension will... Break a lot of the connective stuff that makes your muscles stiff, for instance. And so Keith Barr will explain a lot better than I could, but that's, I always am fascinated by that kind of stuff, because that gets into our next question, which is plyometrics in the off-season, question mark. This is a, this is an it depends, because it's a yes but. So cyclists tend to not Get in a lot of impact. A lot of cyclists tend not to jog or hike or lift heavy things on a regular enough basis. And it creates injury potential in your muscles and joints and bones and everything like that. And so if you are looking for general health, like especially for bone density in your legs and stuff, going for a little jog or like jump rope, These kinds of things are plyometric enough for a cyclist to get a lot of health benefits out of them, is what it seems like the literature says. And so I would say, yes, but don't go into like drop jumps on day one. And don't, I've got a client who's probably listening to this, and I told you not to do this. He started off with two and a half minutes on a single leg jump rope. and then he had crippling calf pain for like several days. So don't do stuff like that. Start really slow and light and keep it light. You're really only looking for bone density. You're not looking to become, who's that old, who's that Russian dude? There's all the videos from like the 70s or 80s. He's in that purple tracksuit and he's like the springiest man you've ever seen in your life. Gunther something? Oh, no. Yeah, Gunthor, he was a shot putter. I think he's actually, I think he was like, I think he was like, He's huge too. German or Swiss or something. Yeah, he was like, his last name's Gunthor, like G. U with an umlaut N-T-H-O with an umlaut R. He was like an 80s or 90s, yeah, like shot putter, and he's like 6'7 and like 280 and just like doing two-legged bounds over like one meter tall hurdles, like eight of them in a row and stuff. You're like, how is this large man moving this fast? Yeah, and part of that is from having super, super, super stiff springy muscles. And so you're not trying to get to that point. You're trying to find a minimum effective dose that doesn't affect anything else. And so you just want to make sure that you are not fucking yourself up. And this is where I would recommend contacting a professional who can design a plyometric program for noobs. that will keep you in the noob phase forever, basically, because that's really all you are probably going to need. You don't need to go into like a full Gunthor track and field. I need to be able to be springy like a gazelle program. You don't need that. I will also say, I think a lot of plyo things people think are like box jumps, like jumping onto a box. And those are great, except that I have seen not a few people like slam, like missed, misjudge a jump on a higher box and slam their shin into it, which is bad news. So like, it's fun to see all those videos of people jumping onto like 38 inch, 48 inch, you know, 50 inch tall boxes, but you don't actually, like, if you just think jump really high, I understand that the tall height can be motivating, but You can lessen some like, you know, tib-fib injury risk there. You jump onto a slightly lower box. Yeah, yeah, it's the speed of the jump itself. Jumping high versus jumping fast are also quite different, by the way, because of the nature of, do you want to jump fast or high? High, you're going to have a larger ground impulse. But if you're jumping fast, you're probably going to have a smaller ground impulse, but you're going to go up quicker. And that's typically for RFD, that's what you want. A lot of the high box jumps that people do, look how much they tuck their legs up. You don't need to do that. And my other favorite box jump fail, I never ever, by the way, assign box jumps. Ever. Partly because I think the injury risk versus reward is not worth it and I'd rather people, you could jump straight into the air and not onto a box and have the same effect. The landing is like irrelevant. So you can have a box that's like, you know, 24 inches high, and you can jump four feet in the air, great, keep your legs straight, who cares? My favorite box jump fail is when people stack plates onto like one of those metal boxes that kind of looks like a stool, and I call it the Jenga jump, because you get to the top, and if you are not alighting perfectly, and you have like kind of a sideways vector. You're going to send that entire pile of plates out from under you like you're jumping onto a cart with wheels. And then you're going to fall and hurt yourself. And as fun as it is to watch when I know everybody's okay, I don't actually want people to get hurt. It's not... Something I enjoy, especially as a coach, where I'm trying to help people get more fit. I find that horrible box jump injuries are detrimental to getting fit, we could say. So, yeah, I don't recommend those. Yeah, tib-fib break, kind of bad for riding. Yeah, like, I'd rather somebody, like, get their shins scratched up from keeping the bar too close on deadlifts. Oops, oh well, just the scraped shin. No Harm No Foul, like when we were six anyway, so, oh yeah, long socks, yeah, wear your soccer shin pads. Is high volume, oh, sorry, this is the next question. Are high volume sessions worth it, aka 10x1 heavy singles on a compound lift? Okay, we're going to have to define high volume first. Because, like, I find a high volume session some... thing where I'm doing anywhere between like 70 to over 100 reps is a high volume session 10 I mean 10 like 9 out of 10 singles like are you peaking for an Olympic weightlifting meet like what what's the goal here like yeah like 10 by 1 heavy singles on a compound lift that's A difficult one to do, like, especially if it's at, like, a pretty high percentage and you're doing it so much. Okay, yeah, so 10 single reps, like, neurally, this is extraordinarily fatiguing. Ask me how I know. I've done these kinds of things before. And they are, they're like, I'd say they're a great finisher. It's like, it's like a dessert on top of a really well-programmed lifting program. So, I don't think 10x1 singles is high volume. So, I would say anywhere from 6 to 8 sets, heavy working sets, of like 10 to 25 reps per set. That's like a proper hypertrophy program for an advanced lifter. There, we can find, yes, that is a... High Volume Session. And depending on how it fatigues you, depending on your goals, depending on a lot of stuff, you may find that it's worth it. You may find that it's not. You may find you can get the same benefits out of doing four or five sets of like eight to 10 instead of really super high volume. So it really depends on what you're looking for and seeing how it affects you on the bike. Yeah, I would. Worry, like, okay, so classic high-volume hypertrophy plans are like, oh, like, German volume training, like, 10 sets of 10 or whatever, you're just like, oh god, yeah, like, good luck walking, you know, it's like, we always joke about, like, doing small of for squats in the off-season, like, a lot of these things, they're really designed for that to be the only thing that you're doing, so my knee-jerk reaction of like, oh, can I do this while also riding a bike? No. Could you? Yeah. But are you going to have a good time? No. Is your injury risk going to be high? Yeah. Is it going to get you sweet internet points? Probably. But they're not giving you a preem in a race for internet points. Yeah. And what is extremely high volume? I guess if you're doing, I would say 10 sets. 10 heavy singles is high intensity, not very high volume. So for super high intensity lifting, I think you'll find the neuro fatigue is off the charts, and you're just going to be like, I can't, like, you're going to, it's not that your muscles can't do it, you're going to have trouble psyching yourself up at a certain point to get ready to do, you know, singles 7, 8, 9, 10 or whatever. Yeah. And at a certain point, and having programmed these for myself, at a certain point, the bar just like for deadlifts, the bar just doesn't even get off the ground. No matter how hard you pull, you're sitting there like, you know, busting vase in your forehead and then nothing's happening and you're like, and you're like, I haven't even strained this hard to take a shit in my life. Like, so, yeah, it's, yeah, the neural fatigue. And that's another thing to watch out for. By the way, speaking of fatigue, I don't think we touched on this earlier, it's like looking for brain fog, looking for lackadaisicalness, grogginess, any kind of stuff like that after a heavy lifting session, I count that as neural fatigue and I get it really, really bad. So I have to be really careful about how I program that kind of stuff. Like if I've got an important meeting later, if I've got to You know, if I've got to program a lot of workouts, or I need brain power at all, I cannot do that kind of stuff. So that's another thing to consider. Like, if I were going to go do sprints after lifting, well, I wouldn't, because I know that they're going to be just ass. So, yeah. Have you considered just having 500 milligrams of caffeine before every... I have done that, and it wakes me up a little bit, but if I had the ability to nap, which I have the worst time falling asleep in the afternoon, but if I could nap... I think I would have a much better time with that, but I really have to get a nine-hour night of sleep to clear out most of the brain fog. Next question. Single leg workouts? I'm presuming this person means doing all of the workout as single leg. And I'm going to suggest never. Yeah, the whole thing. I think, you know, I assume this is a sort of like a sports specificity thing. Like I think it's kind of become trendy now to do more sports specific lifting, you know, things, single legs, like, you know, unless it's Olympic lifting or rowing or what's another sport where you typically actually You know, apply force with both legs at the same time, all the time. Powerlifting, there's not a lot out there. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So, maybe, but this might be going, like you said, a little bit too far, where you're thinking, hey, if you really want to do sport-specific, you, like, practice your sport. Like, nothing more specific than that. But, yeah, the whole thing, too, also, doing single-leg stuff, unless it's, like, only single-leg press, single-leg Curls, Single Leg Extensions, it is pretty taxing on your stabilizing muscles and your core and your back and your shoulders and things like that. So I could see that quickly becoming a limiting factor. Yeah, especially if you do like a single leg squat where balance is an issue or like a rear leg elevated split squat, something like that, if that's your main unilateral lift. And that's the reason I've said like a default program would be like squat and single leg press. because that's a pretty well-rounded program where, and I've tried by the way, I've done this experiment where I do mostly single leg stuff and just like a little bit, a handful of bilateral stuff. The single leg stuff taps out pretty fucking quick. Like after a month, month and a half at the most, where I'm like, I cannot break through this plateau no matter how I program my single leg lifting, I cannot make it stronger. And so, so lifting with two legs, Even though relative to the muscle, it's lower, I find that you have to do both. And I also find that just doing single leg stuff, the injury risk also goes up because you're taxing a lot of your knee stabilizers quite a lot more than if you are doing a combination of unilateral and bilateral stuff. So I don't find it to be that worth it. I would say one thing too is though you can switch up what you're doing first and second. The one that you're always doing second, you're going to end up using just slightly lower loads on than you could if you're going first just because you're a little tired. So that's something if you do want to focus more on the single leg stuff, do that first. It's not a problem. Yeah, and that's also part of periodizing. Especially if you are looking to lift for sprinting. At some point, we'll do single leg stuff first, because whatever you're freshest for, you should probably do first. Whatever's the most important thing, do that first. And that's pretty universal, mostly because you're fresh, you've got the most neural drive, and you've got all your stabilizers, your back, your grip, everything is 100%. So that's a big reason for that kind of stuff, regardless of all the other physiological stuff. The practical stuff for lifting is, by and large, the most important thing to consider, which is why with the physiology and interference effect and all that kind of stuff, that's why I've been kind of downplaying it, because especially in my coaching experience, it is entirely secondary. So, last question. Strength training versus VLA max. What do you mean versus? They're facing off in a death match. Now, one of the things that happens in the VLA-MAX model is if you train for strength, if you do heavy lifting, you are going to increase, theoretically, you could increase your PMAX, which PMAX sets the upper limit for carbohydrate burn. And so if you increase this, and I've done these experiments, by the way, I've done a lot of lactate testing. And I was, you know, investigating VLA Max a couple years ago, and the thing that I found is that the better your sprint, the higher your VLA Max, like, across the board. And, you know, so theoretically, this is true. However, if we take two people of the same VO2 Max, And this is how the VLA max model is supposed to work, is the higher your VO2 max versus your VLA max, the higher your FTP is going to be, because you can, quote unquote, combust the lactate that you make. Lactate is not made obligately first, by the way, it's second, so the model's wrong on its face. According to the model, if you increase your VLA max, I'll write my example. So if we have two athletes with a 400 watt FTP, or let's say like a VO2 max, their same weight, let's say the VO2 max is like 80, something like that. And one of them has a sprint of about 900 watts, and one of them has a sprint of about 1800 watts. You would expect the person with the 1800 watt sprint, to have a lower FTP for the same VO2 max. This is not actually the case. I have a lot of comparable pro clients who have a very high VO2 max and a very high FTP, and some of them have better sprints, some of them have worse sprints. So in theory, if you do a lot of strength training, you are going to increase the rate at which, in the VLA max model, you're going to increase the rate at which you can combust lactate, and at a maximum rate. And in theory, this will increase the rate at which you can produce lactate at a sub-maximal rate. This is also not true. So in theory, your FTP would go down. And for a lot of folks, when you get into the gym way, way, way too much, you spend way too little time on the bike and your training on the bike is impacted. And this, and also your fatigue from the lifting can be horribly impactful on the bike. And so if you're like, man, I was doing my FTP at 300 watts last year. I started strength training and I'm also trying to do FTP work. And now I can really only do 270 watts for my FTP. My FTP went down because my VLA max went up. Dun, dun, dun. This is not happening. Or you're just slightly out of shape. Yeah, you're tired. You're not, you have not increased your VLA Max. You're tired. I've never seen anybody's FTP markedly go down from doing a ton of strength training, unless what they're doing on the bike has been severely impacted. And then it's just fatigue. So yeah, the VLA Max model, it's not real. It doesn't work. Don't worry about it. And strength training is not going to decrease your FTP unless you are severely impacting the quality of on-bike work you do. Full stop. Okay, well, not full stop. But I need to sell people VLA max testing. God, I have so many thoughts. But this is a family shit. No, I'm kidding. This is not, clearly not restricting ourselves to just being a family show here. If families sit down and listen to this podcast, you know there's better stuff to do, right? Oh God, I cannot imagine. Anyway, so what do we have for final thoughts with strength training and cycling? I think, much like recommendations, a lot of these may have sounded fairly similar to tips from other training recommendations, like, don't try to big brain it, like, keep it simple, you know, don't go nuts your first few days, try to think about, you know, sensible progressions, things like that, but also, you know, I really think this time in the offseason, like, it should be fun, like, hopefully you find something in strength training that is enjoyable, because this is going to be You know, a break, and it's got a different routine, and you can try new things. You know, like I said, it, you know, could be a time where you try to figure out, you know, live your inner gym bro life with your buddies for a few weeks. Or basement home gym goblin, maybe that's a better one. Gym goblin. What if it's the garage? Are you a troll? Yeah, I think so, yeah. Don't, you know, don't take lifting advice from men's fitness. That's all I have to say. I agree with not taking lifting advice from men's fitness. And yeah, and remember that you are not a strength athlete. You're an endurance athlete, and strength work is to supplement. And you've got to make sure that whatever you're doing is going to support you on the bike. Rather Than Take Away From On The Bike And Having An Objective Way To View That Kind Of Stuff In Terms Of Watch Your Periodization You Can't Do Everything Hard All The Time I Would Say A Sufficiently Hard Day In The Gym Counts As A Hard Day On The Bike Especially From The Fatigue Generated It Would Count As A High Intensity Day On The Bike Like A Very High Intensity Day And If You're Doing Something Moderate You might get a lot of neural fatigue, or if you're like, you know, going late into the gym work, where you're more focused on sprinting, you really want to reduce the reps and keep high quality stuff, maybe a little explosive, and you want to make sure that's also not impacting you on the bike, but watch your periodization, watch your fatigue, don't be afraid to fuck around. with where things happen, with nutrition protocols, with sets and reps, rotate out exercises if you feel like something is not giving you good benefits, keep it in for a good month or two, something like that. That could be your whole lifting program. Sorry if it is. You'll know better for next year. And the worst mistake you could ever make with anything in all of this is not learning from it. Even if it's going well, there's always ways to optimize better. And yeah, so if you want to get in touch about how to optimize, oh man, that was the worst transition ever, so sorry everybody for the heavy-handedness, but we gotta land this plane, so... Yeah, get in touch if you want to consult about your strength training or your bike training. It's about that time of year. So empiricalcycling at gmail.com, we can consult. We can also take you on as an athlete if you are looking for coaching. If you're, you know, again, if you're new here, please subscribe to the podcast. If you're not and you want to give us an interview, thank you so much. If you would like to share the podcast anywhere, please do. We really, really appreciate that. empiricalcycling.com slash donate and empiricalcycling at gmail.com for all coaching and consultation inquiries. If you are thinking about it for the spring or something like that, no harm in getting the ball rolling sooner than later. So Instagram, Adam Pulford Cycling, if you want to ask questions for the weekend MAs or for the podcast in the future. So yeah, with that, we'll see you all next time. And Kyle, nice to have you back. Nice to be back. 