Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm Kolie Moore and today Kyle Helson is going to be hosting 10-Minute Tips. So remember, if you have not yet subscribed to the podcast, we would love it if you would do so and tell a friend. Word of mouth is great for us. And if you like the show, please give us a nice review on iTunes. That really helps us out a lot. And remember that we are an ad-free podcast, so if you would like to donate, you can do so at empiricalcycling.com slash donate. Also on the website, we have the show notes for the day. And if you have any coaching or consultation inquiries or questions or comments, you can please send an email to empiricalcycling at gmail.com. And before we get started, I'd just like to remind everybody that Kyle is a PhD in physics, so he knows what he's talking about. I always go to him for... for questions on physics and math and stuff like that with regards to cycling. And he's been a great help to me over the years. So I'm going to turn it over to him right now. Welcome, everyone, to this week's episode. I'm your host, Kyle Helson. Cole's got the day off. This week, I'm going to be chatting with you all about something that is my biggest pet peeve in cycling, and that is the myth of rotating weight. Saving a gram off of a component on your bike that rotates typically the wheels or the rims is like saving two grams of weight off of the frame or the rider. And the proponents of this idea claim that this is because of the rotational kinetic energy required to spin those objects in addition to just the linear or the translational kinetic energy required to move that bike and wheels and rider forward. And now this is true. Rotating objects do require power to spin, but I think anyone who is a strong proponent of rotating weight being an excellent savings or the first place to try to save weight on your bicycle hasn't done a lot of math to look at whether the savings is worth the cost. And now, as most of you are probably familiar with, very, very lightweight bike wheels cost a lot more than even moderately heavy bike wheels or than very heavy like crappy training wheels. in my example I'm going to be looking at a rim weight of the one extreme end is going to be a thousand grams and the for the lightweight and the heavy extreme end is going to be two thousand grams so that's a factor of two difference and before I get any angry emails this is looking at the weight only at the rim pretending all the rim weighs a thousand grams and that all the or all the rim weighs two thousand grams yes I understand that hubs and spokes are not exactly at the rim so this isn't exactly Accurate. And yes, I'm familiar. I know that there are super, super lightweight wheel sets that weigh 500 grams or 400 grams per wheel. This is just some ballpark numbers to give you an idea. So I'm not having any particular wheel models in mind, but just bear with me for these examples. So let's say you're racing in a crit and you come into a corner and you slow down to 35 kilometers an hour into that corner, and then you want to re-accelerate up to 40 kilometers an hour. in one and a half seconds out of that corner. How much power does it take if you've got the lightweight rims versus the heavy rims? Now, this is considering two rims. That'd be two rims that weigh a kilogram each or two rims that weigh two kilograms each. Your initial velocity is 35 kilometers an hour. Your final velocity is 40 kilometers an hour. And you take a second and a half to get there. So for those of you thinking about this at home, if you're rolling around at 90 RPMs, a second and a half is going to be like A few pedal strokes to get you from 35 to 40 kilometers an hour, which is probably pretty typical. So in order to accelerate that lightweight wheel set from 35 to 40 kilometers an hour in a second and a half, you're looking at about 11.6 watts. That's including both the linear kinetic energy and the rotational kinetic energy. For those heavy rims that weigh 2,000 grams each, you're looking at a difference of about 23 watts to go from 35 kilometers an hour to 40 kilometers an hour. Now, wait, wait, wait, I know what you're thinking, 12 watts, almost 12 watts, that's a lot, that's a lot, and yes it is, 12 watts is a lot, and if your FTP went up by 12 watts, you'd all be super, super stoked. This is not without context though, because let's say you, the rider, plus your bike, weigh 80 kilograms, and you have to accelerate that 80 kilograms from 35 kilometers an hour to 40 kilometers an hour, and now this is without air resistance, so this number is not even going to be as much as it would be if you considered air resistance to go from 35 kilometers an hour to 40 kilometers an hour in a second and a half for an 80 kilogram rider plus bike requires 771 watts so now you're thinking okay now I'm only saving 10 to 12 watts for a very extreme example Out of 700 Watts. So you're looking at more like a 1 to 2% difference before you consider aerodynamics. And so that percentage is actually going to go down once you consider aerodynamics. And just as a point of reference, for a typical rider, average coefficient of drag, average surface area or frontal area at sea level, typical coefficient of rolling resistance, normal drivetrain losses, etc. Pedaling at 200 watts gets you in the ballpark of that 35 kilometers an hour and pedaling at 300 watts gets you about that 40 kilometers an hour. So this is kind of a realistic scenario for a lot of us weekend warriors. Now, one to two percent, right? So this is for an extreme example of a factor of two. So that's wheels that are twice as heavy only gets you a one or two percent difference. So if you're looking at upgrading and spending money on wheels that will save you only 100 grams or 200 grams, That's going to be an even smaller fraction of a percent difference. Now, if you're going for an hour record, a world championship, a time trial win at the tour, if you're going for a big world record in the team pursuit, I totally understand looking for both the lightest and the most aerodynamic equipment. However, if you're a weekend warrior who's thinking about spending thousands of dollars of your own money, not sponsor money, on wheels that are going to save you 100, 200, 300 grams. Remember that that's going to be less than a 1% savings in power required. Are there probably better areas you can spend that money? Almost certainly. You could look at, for example, a more aerodynamic road helmet or a more aerodynamic position like getting time with a bike fitter who can get you a better More sustainable and aerodynamic and powerful position. You could even look at time in a wind tunnel. You could look at buying something that's going to make your training easier. You could look at something that's going to maybe help you in the long term like coaching or like some sort of clinic. Almost anything is going to get you probably more than just a fraction of a percent difference than going from a wheel set that weighs 1,400 grams to a wheel set that weighs 1,200 grams. I hope everyone enjoyed today's episode. This has been a little bit nerdy. I've got all of the math that I looked at in a spreadsheet that we'll link to in the show notes. So you can go and you can nitpick my math in case I've made any errors here. And yes, there'll be slight differences for people who weigh more or weigh less. And yes, I understand a spoke and a hub on a wheel are not exactly at the same radius as the rim. Those objects rotate at different speeds and they have different moment of inertia and you can make this model more and more and more complicated. I fully understand that, but just for the examples here, I've given you two extremes and hopefully those have been illustrative that even for a factor of two savings in weight, you're looking at still only a one or two percent difference at the max for the amount of power required to move you forward. hopefully we'll see you next time tell all your friends if you enjoyed the show give us a shout out check out our threadless shop comment on the episodes if you want head over to the website thanks everyone Thank you Kyle for hosting and I want to thank everybody as always for listening and if you want to support the podcast share the podcast that's really the best thing that you can do for us and we love it when people share the podcast I love seeing episodes and the articles that I've written posted on message boards and stuff love it when somebody asks a question and somebody says hey you should check out this episode of the Imperial Procycling Podcast we absolutely love that because we're here trying to help everybody train better and you know I am a coach and I I can't coach everybody in the world, but I still want everybody in the world to train better and for every little minute you spend on the bike to go to actually making you faster because if it's not doing that... Thanks everybody! 