Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Kolie Moore, and I want to thank everybody for listening as always, and ask that you share the show and subscribe if you like what we're doing. iTunes rating is great, and remember, we're ad-free, so if you want to donate to the show and support us, you can do so at empiricalcycling.com slash donate. We do have some show notes today. They're up on the website at empiricalcycling.com, and we have merch at empiricalcyclingpodcast.threadless.com, and if you have any coaching consultation, inquiries, questions, or comments, please email me directly at empiricalcycling at gmail.com. and also on the Instagram at Empirical Cycling. As you might have guessed, we have weekend AMAs in the Instagram stories. So come on over and participate in that if you'd like. I have noticed if you've made a blank Instagram account to follow me and ask questions, I appreciate that. You don't have to participate in Instagram. You can just ask questions and watch. That's fine. All right. So this episode, I brought on a friend of mine who is a current PhD student at the University of Nevada, Reno. And he is a teaching assistant. He is kind of a wealth of information, as you're going to hear, on psychology. and coaching relationships and just relationships in general. And he's also an endurance coach and he's an endurance athlete. He is a really smart guy and I was really happy to have him on and also he's doing a current study. So listen to the last 20 minutes or so of the episode if you want to participate in that. We've got contact stuff in the show notes. Without further ado, here's my conversation with Patrick Smith. We sort of just jumped right into it in the middle of the conversation. so I apologize for that there's there's no proper intro we just start talking and we just roll with it so here you go and I will see you on the other end so there's this thing of like we as the as the authority figure as the expert that the athlete is coming to we roll into the conversation with this expectation of like I have to have all the answers yes but in reality it's not all the answers that our athletes are seeking it's just clarification on one question and it might take a couple of back and forth in that dialogue where like they ask a question and maybe they don't have the words for it you know they're not an expert so they're just parsing together like their best attempt at describing the experience and if you just take that first shot and run on it the way you understood their question and the way they understood their question can be light years apart. And if you just ran from that point on, they're still at their question. They're like, wait, what did I just say? And so the best way to like have a constructive conversation as the one that they're coming to to seek the answers for is to have this extensive back and forth about like, okay, what are you asking? Like describe this thing to me. Give me some more characteristics. Is it more like this or is it more like this? Is that something that can be worked on over time? Yeah, absolutely. I'm sure you've been doing this for a while, but how long have you worked on this? How has the evolution been for you? Because I assume you wouldn't get into sports psych in any way or evolutionary psych without having some sort of idea about this. So, I mean, I see very little difference between, like, the interaction, I mean, in very general terms, I see very little difference between the interaction that a sports psych or a coach has with a client and the interaction a teacher has with a student. and throughout my grad school experience we're coming up you know into the sixth year of grad school my funding has always been teaching freshman introductory psychology in either group or individual settings and even before that in undergrad my job on campus was tutoring I tutored economics and business law and a little bit of psychology and the the most successful interactions you have as a teacher are not the ones where you spend the whole time talking. They're the ones where you're asking questions to establish a shared language. Because we have, and this is more informed by my more recent training in grad school about language and psychology language and all that kind of stuff. We have a shared language. But just because I say rat and you say rat doesn't mean we're both talking about a brown, small New York subway rat or a bright white lab rat. Right. And so there's that shared experience and yet there's still inaccuracy in our language. And the job, the responsibility of the expert is not only to bring their technical knowledge to bear. to influence the athlete's behavior or the student's behavior, but it's also to first clarify shared experience and shared language to the point where you're starting from the same place. Yeah, that makes a lot of sense. I mean, actually, in some ways, I feel like I have kind of screwed myself with the podcast because I do so much research for it. And then somebody asked me some question on some minor detail, and I'm like, oh, yeah, I... Oh shit. And I come up blank. And, and it might be a very simple thing that I like forgot from intro bio or intro biochem or whatever it is, or it might be something that nobody knows the answer to. And it's, it's one of those things where I, I love that actually. Cause I actually, you're right. I do feel that pressure to know everything. And I think a lot of coaches do. And you know, one of the, One of the things that I learned early on from a coach I had was saying like, oh, yeah, I fucked up. And I thought that was a powerful moment because I was like, oh, this guy, I think he knows exactly what he's doing. And yet here's this moment of weakness of, you know, he doesn't. And, you know, when we parted ways, he was like, yeah, I'm sorry, I could never figure it out. And I thought this was going to happen sooner that we would part ways. Glad you stuck it out with me. But I saw this coming. And I was like, I was on one hand, I was like, I respect that. But on the other hand, I was like, why don't you say something, dude? You know, yeah, that's actually so so the thing you're talking about of like, the moment where somebody goes, I don't know. I know you're coming to me as the expert in And even though I've dedicated a lot of my life to this, that particular question, I don't know the answer to. That's an ability that has to be learned. And there's a lot of coaches out there and people in other expert positions that never learn that quality. And so interactions with athletes or other clients is this. weird mixture of like, sometimes they're telling you something accurate and actionable. And sometimes they're telling you something actionable that's not accurate. And this is actually something that comes up in the remote coaching. You know, we're working through emails and we're working on calendars and all we ever have is Zoom chats. We never even meet somebody in person. the conversation is so stripped of other data and interactions that we would get if we were out at the track or we were out at the cross-country trail or whatever it may be where we're like oh I caught that little body cue or I caught or we're having a casual conversation and you mentioned this thing when it's much more formalized much more narrowed down into these limited communication channels we can either Make assumptions, fill in the blanks for that missing data, and just give actionable information and wait until we get feedback on whether it works or not. Or we can ask more questions and get a little closer to the phenomena that's being described by the athlete or the client. Yeah, actually, that reminds me of something that happened to me a couple years ago. I was coaching a guy and I had never met him in person which is usually the case with most of my clients and he happened to be at a cross race where I was I was there for the ACCC and I you know I was the assistant conference director at the time and I was there to hand out medals and see how the process worked and stuff and learn it and you know outside of all the you know a formal call or a meeting we just sat down at a table and just hung out. And that was probably one of the most productive conversations that I've ever had with a client. I'm nodding so much right there. I started nodding and I was like, this is a podcast. It's not video. Oh my gosh. Yes. These days I've had very similar experiences. Getting moments to engineer casual conversation, not engineer the path of the conversation, but build opportunities to interact at this much less rigid kind of coach client level can really produce these little asides, these little comments, these little indications of like Oh, that's not comfortable. Or, Ooh, I really don't like that. Or I really do like that. That can actually give us so much more actionable insight into working with our athletes. And so, yeah, I've had those same experiences where just by chance we were in the same location and we were like, Hey, let's take five minutes and just have a chat. Let's walk along the race course or watch these riders or whatever, and just be talking side to side or sitting at the bar kind of thing. And whoa. like coaching relationships, client relationships, you know, student teacher relationships, maybe not so much at the bar, but that's where it really happens. And yeah, so it's an extra challenge in these remote work kind of situations to make those opportunities. Yeah, for sure. And, you know, I'm somebody who... has suffered from a great deal of social anxiety myself, like to the point where, you know, well, as most 90s kids who grew up a lot on the internet, I was like, oh, I've got to call this person. What do I say? It's like, just say what you have to say and they'll respond and then you hang up. Like, I had to learn that because it's a skill that I lost by being so online growing up. Whenever one of my clients is like, oh yeah, we got to meet sometime, part of my brain goes, oh, that's going to be awesome. I really want to meet this person. And the other part of my brain is like, that's going to be so awkward potentially. I'm laughing because I'm thinking about last week when you proposed coming on the podcast. And I was in a space and I was just like... One part of me was like, yes, finally, we're going to do this. We've been talking about this for years. And the big part of me was like, you're not graduated. You haven't finished your PhD. You know you're going to be horrible. Social anxiety, like not qualified. Yeah, just terrifying, like discomfort of the thing. And now we're sitting here and we're just having a casual conversation and it's great. Yeah. And I'm probably not even going to. Do a formal start. We're just going to drop in in the middle and see what happens. Well, actually, you had said something about rules and such. And that's something that you mentioned in the article, hitting on one of my points now, good podcaster I am. We'll cross this out. About the, you know, one of your articles about... How Not to Rickroll Your Athletes. You talked a lot about rules and such. You had recommended to me a couple books and I leafed through them. There was a lot of that type of language where I was mystified. Reading some of the articles you've written for Training Peaks, to be honest, I got lost halfway through because it's like you're talking about shared language. I didn't share that language with you. One short... because Training Peaks articles, you're usually pressed for space, like a short definition of a thing. It's hard to get it to sink in your head. It's like reading a biochem paper and every time I see any kind of acronym, like NADH, I remember learning that and then doing my exam, I aced all my biochem stuff, go figure. And I was like, okay, this is great. I know what NADH is. Six months later, I ran across it and I was like, Oh no, I forgot what that is. And so I've had to like redefine every sort of acronym every time I run across it, especially in chemistry, like a nicotinamide dinucleotide. It's like every time I've got to like say that in my head to get it there. Um, so when you say rules now, now you need to tell me like, what's the short phrase I need to know because you're, um, Expertise in Psychology has a different definition of rules, but it's probably the one that I would think of. Very much so. But it's probably tweaked for your own purposes. So when you say a rule, what are we talking about? Okay, so quick background. My area of psychology is behavior analysis. Behavior analysis has kind of gone off on its own for a long time. And one area that it's found a lot of success is with... Individuals with developmental disabilities. But in general, when behavior analysts talk about behavior of a human being, they're talking about that human interacting with their environment. And so very commonly we talk about stimulus. So is the environment like other people or is it just, you know, I'm on the road and I'm seeing trees and I'm negotiating terrain kind of stuff? Great, great question. It's literally interaction with anything that is not, I shouldn't even use this qualifier that's not themselves because thoughts and feelings are a product of themselves and yet we interact with them. The Gödel-Escher-Bach version of Psychiatry. Yeah, it's very fractal in nature, which also makes it really hard to read the research papers. Yeah, self-referential and also sometimes self-referential. Oh man. Anyways, get back. We talk about an individual interacting with stimulus in their environment, their environment being everything, and stimulus being a particular stimulating event, a thought, a feeling, a rat running in front of them. An interaction with a person, a flat tire. Exactly. So when we talk about rules in my area of study, What we're talking about is a special type of stimulus that is a verbal stimulus. And when I say verbal, most of us think about talking, like vocalizing. But when my field talks about verbal, what we're talking about is something that functions as language. Sometimes that's vocal. Sometimes that's written. Sometimes that's your body position. Right. And so the term verbal is much wider, but it encompasses these stimulating events that communicate something. And so a rule is a particular verbal stimulus that communicates a if-then contingency. So it's not like me saying the mitochondria is the powerhouse of the cell. It's not that classic thing. It's sort of like actually the whole basis of the podcast. It's like if this, then that. And it's sort of like every it depends question that's ever been asked. Yep. Yeah. There is a little bit of that. What you said, the mitochondria is the powerhouse of the cell is considered an equivalence statement. Mitochondria is equal to powerhouse. Is this going to be on the quiz? It's going to be on the quiz. If you want to keep reading my research, it's going to be on the quiz. I will say that some rules are just equivalence statements. They're just like, this is this. rules as a stimulating event are some sort of if this, then that kind of contingency statement. All right. So how do we not rickroll our athletes? Like what did that mean in the first place? Like never going to give you up, never going to let you down. So I, cause sorry for everybody that just got that stuck in their head. If you've ever watched Ted Lasso, wait till second season. It gets better. Oh boy. That is such an excellent show, just as an aside. But the Rick Roll reference in that article was the kind of unintended consequence or the practical joke of sorts that may have gone a little too far. The internet culture. Is that a thing that coaches do with athletes? Because honestly, that's one of the things that I try to never do is like, if I'm going to make any kind of joke, I want it to be extremely obvious that I'm joking. Right. So no, it's not something that we actively do. And that's part of the reason that I framed the article the way I did is to bring to attention that things that we do as coaches can unintentionally mess with our athletes. So like, what's, what's an easy example of that? Like, what have I accidentally done? That's what I want to know. I don't know if you've actually done this, considering that we've had some conversations about this a little bit, but I have heard plenty of athletes that have come to me and said, to be competitive, I have to hit X watts per kilogram. And I can't get stronger, so that means I have to get lighter. I've heard that many times. Right. Okay. If you're a coach and you're saying that to your athlete, you're not going to get stronger, so you have to get lighter. And you just keep doing that reframe over and over and over again. You have to get lighter. You have to get lighter. You have to get lighter. And after the person develops the eating disorder, what then? Exactly. The eating disorder is the Rick rolling. So many from a, from a very surface level, when we look at racing, whether it's running or, or riding weight is a huge factor. That's not going to change. Watts per kilogram does play a part in competition. But if you're going to just hit that hammer, hit that nail so many times that your athlete constantly only approaches it from the weight side, you're going to give your athlete an eating disorder. And you might not intend it. And so the unintended consequence of hammering that rule is eating disorder. And maybe it's not only eating disorder. Maybe somebody just doesn't have the physical capacity to be competitive at the level that they want to. And the only way they're ever approaching it is through caloric restriction. Well, now you've got Caloric restriction leading to all the complications of caloric restriction, like their brain doesn't work. I don't know if you've ever hung out with bodybuilders. Oh yes, I have actually. And I've done, I've done bad dieting myself. My friends were like, dude, you are like asleep on your feet. Can you please go have a burger? And I'm like, no, I can't. I've got Hilltown's coming up in three months. I'm never going to win Hilltown's. I don't know that at the time, but it got to the point where I was like, this is stupid. And like, I had a coach who, you know, wasn't paying attention to that. for the rate that he was charging me. Obviously, it was very, very cheap and it wasn't part of the plan. But I at some point was like, I can't even train. I can't function. I was in school. Nothing was working. But that was a thing I did to myself. But I think you're right. It's so much worse when you've got a coach, like a person of authority, who's hammering that home. and saying, you know, you've got to do this. You've got to do this. And, you know, honestly, I think a lot of the time somebody is training well and they do have the potential, they will get stronger and they can get lighter at the same time. But, you know, you've got to do it carefully. Exactly. And that was that was my point that I was trying to make is like, hey, coaches, check this out. If you press a rule, if if you if you're a one trick pony as a coach. It's only this, always this, ever this. Most of your athletes, they're not going to see consistent success because you're going to build a very, very rigid, rule-governed athlete. Not only are they not going to see consistent success, but they're going to have all this fallout. You're likely setting them up for eating disorders. You might be setting them up for anxiety or depression. Really strange stuff. Like, I mean, I would hate to think of anybody sending an athlete into a Peloton when they don't have enough calories in their head. Like, you can't respond fast enough if you don't have the calories to even think. Yeah, the decision making capability really tanks if you are underfed. Yeah. And I noticed that, like, you know, just if I... I have a hard time eating breakfast most days if I'm not on a scheduled diet. And I'll just like wake up and I'll like one o'clock rolls around and I'm like, oh my God, why am I sleepy? It's like, oh, right, idiot. You need to eat something. Exactly. And eating is the big one. Like eating is the one that is the easiest to like highlight of if a coach hammers the weight and the caloric intake, it becomes a... Problem. But there's so many other ones, like a running coach that tells their athletes they have to be on the front of the pack all the time, or they can't kick until 400 meters from the line. If they hit that all the time, and then say a cycling coach training sprinting on road racing, and they tell their athlete, you cannot kick, you can't pull out into the wind and go for it until 200 meters to go. and they get on a downhill finish where you need to go at three or 400 meters. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. That person's going to wait till 200 and they're going to get dusted by everybody else who was flexible enough to identify the context, identify that they needed to diverge from the rule and apply the effective behavior. That's a good way to do it. But also I think that touches on something else I wanted to ask you about, which is like, Cyclists are for the most part hugely internally motivated like to the point where we are mostly like highly functioning psychos and you know a lot of us and you know myself and I've done this too where we'll overwork ourselves because if you know three workouts are good six workouts are better 12 workouts are best and you know I think Along with the rules thing, people will flog themselves to death because they think more is better and they don't ever want to chill out. And is that one of those, you know, where do you think that comes from? Like, what's the deal? Is it like a rule that we've learned? Is it cultural? That, yes, and yes. And we were talking about earlier, like most rules are contingencies, if this, then that. But what you just described, and you said it yourself, some rules are just equivalence relations. Moore is better. And so you've got somebody who's, okay, so when I was an undergrad, I worked with a researcher who was studying CrossFitters. And part of the reason that we were looking at CrossFit athletes was they have anecdotally a very high frequency of training while injured and incidences of things like rhabdomyolysis. Which is a phrase that most people shouldn't even know, but because CrossFit, most people know it now. Exactly. Like they even have, if you go into the early CrossFit literature and like promotion materials and stuff like that, they have a caricature called Uncle Rab. Oh no. You should not. If you are in an organization that has a cartoon character about a serious medical condition induced by overtraining. that should be a red flag about participating in that culture. Oh God. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. So yeah, I thought, yeah. And once CrossFit started to become a thing, I was like, oh my God, like cyclists have nothing on CrossFitters for internal motivation. Like you cannot stop these people. And so I appreciate that, but also, oh my God. So you talked about this like internal motivation thing and athletes being like functioning psychopaths. Athletes are high functioning because the culture, the family, whatever that they've grown up in has established these equivalence rules. The only the only option isn't a the only option is to win. I have to be competitive. More is better. And then you take something like that and you distill it down to the most potent elements, social reinforcement, and do it every day and lift more, lift bigger, lift faster. And that's CrossFit. pushing yourself. Well, if that's all you do, if that's your two trick pony right there, it's not surprising at all that we get Uncle Rab. It's not surprising at all that we have a really high incidence of training while injured. Yeah. And so what we a lot of times attribute to like internal drive, it's actually a product of our social environment. Is that why a coach saying you can rest, you can relax is so powerful for some people? Sometimes, but only if the coach is actually following that up with rewarding the athlete for resting and relaxing. Think about this. You're a client, you've got a coach, and the coach says, hey, you need to rest this much and you need to work out this much. And whenever you rest, the coach doesn't do anything. And whenever you work out, the coach says, nice job. Or maybe they say, hey, check out this PR that you just did. Every time you work out, which one are you going to respond to? The resting or the acknowledgement of the PRs? That's a good question. Just because somebody tells you you have to do something doesn't mean you're going to consistently do it. Yeah. And if they're telling you, you have to do a number of different things, but they're only actually being responsive to one of those, you're going to optimize your behavior to that one thing that they're responsive for. And so you're going to stop resting and you're going to start working out more. And that's when the coach says, you got to chill out, buddy. Right. They've already dug themselves into a hole, and if they continue to do this pattern where the only response is, hey, you've got to chill out, and there's nothing more, there's not an additional salient cost or salient reward for resting, then rest is still going to be compromised. Well, I usually feel like one of the things I try to tell people, because a lot of my athletes at this point like they're, they're into the rest game. And I'm always asking them, you know, how are you feeling? Or they'll tell me, oh, this workout, you know, I'll give them like a six to seven out of 10 workout, you know, coming back from rest. And if it doesn't go well, I'll be like, okay, more rest. And they'll be like, great. Or they'll be like, this was great. I feel great. Let's do more. Okay, cool. We'll do more. So, you know, I think on some level that back and forth, I think helps. But also I think that You're right that I don't comment on people's rest days much, but I look at them and I think, was this too hard? And actually a lot of people will prompt like, oh, this was a little harder than I intended because this, that, or the other thing. So I think that there's a good back and forth because this is me defending myself now. It's okay. It's okay. I got a better defense for you. What's your better defense? Because I think the only positive reinforcement I've given people on rest days. I mean, other than, you know, I'm glad you took the day off instead of getting on the bike for more sleep or something like that. We'll be like, you know, I think I've never seen. I want to press pause right there. That is like social attention and social interaction is a very powerful reinforcer. So never underestimate simply having a conversation with your athlete as an effective reinforcer. The flip side of that is interactions, whether they are aversive or appetitive, can work as a reinforcer. Yelling at an athlete can still reinforce the behavior that resulted in yelling. And this is the counterintuitive thing. That's the entrenchment thing of you present somebody information opposite to what they believe and they dig in harder. So a little bit of that and a little bit more of just like if the thing is attention that is reinforcing, any attention will be reinforcing. How would somebody determine whether that's the motivator? Systematically applying and withholding attention and watching the frequency of the behavior. Oh, that sounds like a very deliberate thing. That's a lot of thought and energy to do that. Even if you've only got one client, that's still a lot of thought and energy. Okay, so we were talking about articles that I've written for Training Peaks. I will link them all in the show notes, by the way, including the Rick Rowling article. Okay, so watch for the article, When Selective Ignoring May Be Right for Your Athlete. Oh, I read that one. I liked it. And that's the whole thing. Like, attention is a powerful motivator. And if you systematically moderate your attention and pay attention to how the athlete's behavior is changing, they're more compliant, they're less compliant, they rest more, they rest less, they bring up more problems, they don't bring up as many excuses, whatever it may be. You've got to be really, really clear on what the target behavior is that you're modifying your attention to. you can really quickly notice whether or not attention is the maintaining reinforcer. Yeah. Yeah. Cause I don't notice that I honestly, I've never really had that issue with any of my athletes of them like going too hard when they should be resting. So let me, let me pull us back to how we got here. Okay. Cause I was going to say, I would be really scared to try the, to try the attention giving a slash was holding thing. Cause that seems like something I would need to be board certified to do. Honestly. That's not a bad place to start. Something else. In terms of my question or in terms of like. Okay. I'm not stepping back yet. I'm responding to your question. It's not a bad place to look at that and say, whoa, this is really powerful. I don't know if I want to mess with it. Right. Okay. That's totally cool. I appreciate that perspective. Okay. and people can reach out to me if they read that article and they listen to this podcast and they're like okay what I need more information I'll talk people through this a little bit if they want to try it and probably the best thing to try it on is athletes providing justification that have you ever had an athlete that will tell you why they did everything yes And maybe 50% of the time it might be actionable and 50% of the time you're like, I don't think you actually know why you did that. I would say 50% of the time it's actionable and the other 50% of the time. I would say it looks like something that they think might matter for my analysis of the workout. But in reality, if they didn't mention it, I could never tell. And even after mentioning it, I don't think it matters. Right. Yeah. So that can be that particular type of behavior, justification providing or explanation providing behavior is one that you can try this out with. Yeah. If an athlete comes to you and says, Hey, I did this workout to here and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. You can focus your attention on the workout part that like did the workout didn't do the workout. Okay. And focus the conversation there and not provide attention to the justification and see if they keep bringing justifications to the table. Yeah. because usually I say, oh, yeah, no worries about this. And then I do focus on the workout part, you know, because I don't most of the time, you know, it's like, oh, I stopped for a little longer than I intended. I wanted to catch up with people. And, you know, going back to how important social interactions are, like I encourage that, you know, it's like you stop at a you get coffee and a muffin and you run into some friends and you want to stop and hang out for a bit. I think that's fantastic. As long as when you get back on the bike, you don't go right into an interval. Yeah, and I agree. Most of that casual interaction is really, really useful. Sometimes you might come across clients that it seems way too much of your interaction is them providing excuses, providing justifications. And that's the context under which you might try moderating your attending to the excuse providing. Oh, that's really good. Yeah, because I think that I... Well, this is just for me now. I cannot speak for everybody else, obviously. But I think when that kind of stuff comes up, I do think, you know, how much does this warrant addressing? And most of the time, because I'm very conscious of my own time, and I'm extremely conscious of my client's time. You know, and I don't want to take up too much of their time with things that probably are inconsequential. And so I go through the checklist in my head of, you know, does this matter? And how much does this affect the workout? And how much is this going to matter in the future? And is this going to affect anything? If somebody's like, oh, I didn't ride today because I barely got any sleep and they've got a race in two days, that warrants attention. Yeah. Yeah. And so what you're doing is a context-specific sensitivity and flexibility. I knew you were going to have a term for that. I mean, most of my terms come back to flexibility and context sensitivity. Flexibility meaning it always depends. It always depends. It literally always depends. And we can have a long philosophy discussion about that, but I don't think you want to walk down that rabbit hole right now. No, definitely not. And I would be holding a candle amongst flamethrowers is what would happen. But that also brings us back to earlier when we were talking about like providing useful rules is it's not always about the rules as it is about building up an athlete's ability to be responsive to the context. Sorry, can you explain that again? My smooth brain didn't get it. No, that's totally okay. So we want athletes that regardless of what's going on, they are paying attention to their body. They are paying attention to the people around them and they are paying attention to where they are in the event and the most important strategies and tactics of that particular time point. So they are going to be context sensitive and from those inputs, they're going to be flexibly engaging in the behaviors that produce the outcomes they are working towards. So that's one of those things where... Like for instance, I have spent a lot of time with some clients trying to get them fit enough to be able to make decisions in the race. And so, and a lot of the time with coaching, that's actually where I think, you know, there's like this whole new world of coaching is not just making people fit. It's making people, you know, think about energy management and race management. I'm not somebody who's ever been a breakaway rider. I was always a sprinter. But once in a while, I'll get a client who does solo breakaways a lot. And it's like, you might want to think about bringing other people with you. And even if that means that you're going to be third out of a three-person breakaway, that's better than being eighth in a field sprint. I forget where I was going with that, but you probably know. I think I know. What you're working on, whether you're talking about shared language, whether you've put it in these terms or not, is you're working on building an athlete that listens to many different sources of stimulation in their environment and responds based on that feedback. When we provide rules, it's really easy to stop listening to other stimulation in our environment. True. Actually, I have a great example of that with somebody who I could never get it to click, where her thing was always, she's got to stay out of the wind. And she was just on the back of the field the entire time. And she never quite... got used to, I've got to be able to put myself in the wind to improve position for this other thing. So she was always like, I got to save energy. I got to save energy. And that was detrimental to her performances. And I could never break her out of that. And listen to what you were just saying. I got to save energy. What does that sound like? That sounds like a rule. There you go. And what you're describing is what in our field we would call rigid rule governed behavior. The rigidity part. That's self-explanatory, finally. Yeah. That like, I am going to follow this rule all the time. Yeah. And it loses that context sensitivity. It loses that flexible responding. And it causes problems. Yeah. I always think about it like that moment in the matrix where... because, you know, high 90s kid. And wait, you're about my age too. Yeah, yeah, yeah. No, I got you. We got shared language here. Okay, cool. Yeah. So it's like when Morpheus was like, some rules can be bent, some can be broken. And I think about that all the time in terms of bike racing because there are certain rules people think about. Like if you watch the Butterfly Effect, the Chris Horner podcast slash video, YouTube, whatever it is, you know, he talks about, well, he talks about rules all the time like you never want to leave your GC leader until this point in the race or you always want to leave this to that and it's like you know those are I think things that can that can be useful if the race is 80 to 90 percent predictable in terms of its behavior and how it plays out and I think actually that's one of the things I love about some of the classics like like Roubaix is one of the best examples of you never know what's going to happen and you have to be flexible. And sometimes Johan van Sommeren wins and other times Tom Bonen wins again. Exactly. It's a great thing. And you brought up something that's really worthwhile pointing out because when I'm going on this like rules can be dangerous, rules can be bad. I was about to ask, when can rules be good? That's the thing. Rules show up because they're useful. We say that if you want to be a competitive climber, you got to have a pretty extreme watts per kilogram in their like four minute, 10 minute, 20 minute efforts. That's where that rule is quite useful. But it's not so much that rules per se are bad. It's that when we apply them. They're either going to be effective or ineffective And so when you're defending yourself about giving rules to athletes, it's not so bad to give rules to athletes, but you want to target flexibility Useful, Workable Application of Rules. Yeah. Well, I think I was more defending not giving so much feedback on easy days. But I probably have given people rules before because sometimes I think that's a good way to establish a learning thing. I've got this on my list of podcasts to do, which is forever long and we'll never get through all of them. But eventually, if I live long enough, I want to get to a podcast where we discuss is kind of the stepladder of, you know, learning to race and actually in coaching and like being a coached athlete even of like, when do you, when do you say go to this race and I don't care what your result is, you want to work on doing this, like making your way through the Peloton or like establishing a breakaway or, you know, trying new like fake attacks or, you know, just reading other people. So what you're talking about is using rules in a limited sense to bring an athlete into contact with certain situations. Yes. Because the contact and the consequences are what is actually going to shape the athlete to be a better athlete. Yeah, because I think a lot of people start a race only thinking about the final result and not about the process. Where I think the process... is in a lot of ways as important, if not more than the final result, because even if there's not, you know, even if this race doesn't go well today, you've got more races coming up on the horizon. Absolutely. It's like, it's like you can eat something and spoil your appetite because you know, you've got another appetite right behind it to quote or misquote Jerry Seinfeld. I think, you know, it's funny that you say eating. You just reminded me of working with a iron distance athlete that. hadn't ever really experimented with in-effort fueling, like long, long effort fueling. And it took a little bit of convincing to get him to go out on long efforts and overeat. I do know people who will not take a bite of food during an interval. Yeah. No matter how long it is, 40 minutes, won't eat. Yeah. And yet, if you can get them to try that, sure. And you're going to want to have a very open conversation with them beforehand so that they can give enthusiastic consent. But the only way we learn the limits of our capacities is by finding the limits of our capacities. And in the situation where it's either get calories in to sustain or not get calories in and have not enough, fueling, we need to explore. What can we eat? When can we eat it? How much can we eat? And how much variation can we tolerate? And so going out and doing efforts where the goal is not so much the effort itself or maybe the effort itself is eating. And sometimes we're going to get it wrong. We're going to say eat. more than you think you can. And sometimes it's going to go in and it's going to come back out. And so that's the like really, really enthusiastic consent. Get them on board, get them bought in to this idea. And also prepare them for the worst that could happen. Right. But at the same time, those athletes that come into contact with their limits and they feel the consequences of that, or they come into contact with the consequences of a successful behavior. that they've never done before. That broadens the repertoire of the athlete to be able to flexibly respond to different situations. The way you talk about it, you do a lot of that. You talk about noticing your bodily signals and noticing if you were able to complete hard efforts and how that might have reflected on rest and things like that. Ultimately, the goal is not to train a pile of rules because for any huge pile of rules, that is insignificant compared to all the trillions of different permutations of world experiences we can have. That makes perfect sense. And I bet there's somebody in computer science who would tell you something like that or some mathematician be like, oh, yeah, it's because this out of the other thing. So the idea is instead of train a giant pile of rules and say, like, know this book front to back, we want to train a small set of behaviors that are generative, that apply to all of the different situations. Yeah, and giving people the experience in those situations where they learn, oh, this time this happened. And actually, that's one of the things that I think I also wanted to bring up to you is because a lot of the time, The post-race analysis never stops with some people. And in some ways, like I used to be like this personally, I don't do much reflecting these days, but I used to be extremely internally focused and reflective to a point where it was probably not functional on my life. But, you know, I'm... now out of my 20s and that's really out of my teenage years. Oh my God, I was awful. Where are we all? I was about to say hopefully, but hopefully not. Oh my God. I hope somebody made it. It's okay. We learned, right? We did the thing. We were bad at it. We learned from the fact that we were bad at it. We changed our behavior. One would hope. And I always say it takes getting dumped to make one of those behavioral changes. And as somebody who's been dumped a lot, as some listeners are probably not surprised about, I have made a lot of changes. But I think actually, you know, people being that introspective after races, like I said, may be detrimental at some point. But also I think it's really good because I have some athletes who will give me post-race reports that are pages long. And it's a bunch of permutations about this is what happened, this is what I thought, and these were the actual consequences of... this action. And how could I have done this better? And it's a long list of those. And I don't know if it's possible for somebody to learn from like 10 different things in a single race. I hope so. Because I certainly get feedback on all of it. But I think, you know, to what degree is that kind of reflection beneficial? And like, where do you think it starts getting detrimental? Right. Yeah, there's actually a great journal article that I love to give all my research assistants. It's one of their first ones that goes at exactly this. And mind you, the journal article is looking at people who are seeking clinical services. So it applies loosely. But what they looked at was if somebody is really introspective, if somebody is really sensitive to their environment, is that beneficial when the environment changes? and vice versa. If somebody is not very introspective, is not very sensitive to their environment, is that beneficial when the environment changes? So in our case for bike racing, how would we like, because I don't exactly know what you mean by how the environment changes. Right, right. So I'll give the example of what's in the paper first and try and explain it this way. They had participants. had two buttons and they had a cursor, just a little light in a row of lights. And you press one button and the light moves and you press the other button and nothing happens. Oh, that's infuriating. Oh, yeah. So they have the choice, press one button or press the other button and get the light from one side of the row to the other side of the row. And so after a while, pretty quickly, they figured out that pressing one button gets that light moving across. They do that for a while, and then the researchers, without telling the participant or otherwise signaling it in any way, changed which button moves the light. The rules changed. And then they said, how long does this person keep pressing the old button before they try the new button? And how many times do they have to try the new button before they stop pressing the old button? Was there any other behaviors noted, like cursing, possibly? They did a couple different variants. They did one where participants were given very little in the way of instruction. They did one where participants had to, after they'd done it a little bit, they had to write down the rule of a self-generated, when I press this, the cursor moves like this. When I press this, the cursor moves like that. And they saw if that affected the persistence of the old rule. And they also had these participants go through some tasks where it was assessing how sensitive they were to the world around them. How much do they notice? And those individuals who noticed a lot, like way off of the mean, they tended to be just as unresponsive to the change in the rule as those individuals who noticed very little. They kept going on the old button for much longer than those in the middle of this sensitivity scale. Oh, interesting. Yeah, but it happened on both ends of the spectrum. Yeah. People that weren't... They were paying a lot of attention, so to say. They were not particularly sensitive. They kept going on the button pressing. Like when the rule changed, they kept going on the old button. Yep. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. And so what was highlighted in this data is that the question you're asking, like, is there an optimal amount of introspection or sensitivity? It seems like the answer, according to the button study, would be yes. Yeah. And yeah, according to the button study, yes, there is an optimal amount. And it turns out it's not too insensitive and it's not too sensitive. It's somewhere in there's like a Goldilocks zone in the middle. And and so when we're talking about athletes and those athletes that just analyze and analyze and analyze and in the race, they're noticing and noticing and noticing like small, small, small, small details. They may lose focus on the task at hand. There you go. Just as much as the athlete that doesn't notice anything. Yeah. And so it seems like there would be, I mean, isn't that part of experience being super beneficial to athletes too, though? Because if you go to a race and It's raining. You know, based on your previous experience, I need to do X, Y, Z. But if you don't notice or you didn't look at the weather report that it might rain, you might screw yourself by not dressing warm enough or not bringing enough food or not thinking, oh, when it's raining, I cannot have this bar in my back pocket because it's going to get wet and get all over my pockets and I'm not going to be able to eat it or something like that. Where was I going with that? I think you were going like How do we find that Goldilocks zone? Or how do we train that Goldilocks zone? Yeah. And yeah, it's the prioritization of that your experience teaches you of this matters and this doesn't. Or, you know, going down your mental checklist of like, like, for instance, if I'm gonna like go, if I'm gonna travel somewhere, like, do I need to bring my bike? If I do, then I have this other list. If not, like that gateway to that decision tree is just shut off. And I think that's something that a lot of athletes do with experience as they go is they whittle down those decision trees to, you know, a couple main things. Is this happening? Yes, no. Okay, move on. Does that make sense at all? It totally does. And actually, your metaphor of the decision tree gets into how do we get this to happen across many different contexts? Yeah. How do we get our athletes to regularly? figure out these priorities in a manner where we don't have to train the entire decision tree every single time. And the way we do it in my area of training is through values clarification, contextually sensitive clarity on what is the most important. Okay, so now we need to define values clarification? Uh-huh. Okay. Okay, so let's start with values. Values itself, like you gave this example of the priority decision tree. What's at the top of the tree? What takes priority after that? And working your way down and down and down this tree. Values are what are at the top of the tree and they're context sensitive. When I'm an athlete and I'm showing up at a race, I have a different top value than when I am being a husband and I show up to my anniversary with my wife. Right, because you don't want to show up to your anniversary in full kit Exactly I might not want to show up to my anniversary ready to like lay down the hammer either Boy, we're going to gloss right over that joke Yes Oh yeah Language is lovely. Yeah, but the example that I usually use is like the boxer. In the ring, the number one guiding priority might be to be aggressive. Yeah. I want all of my behaviors while I'm in the ring to represent aggressiveness. Because you've probably watched a lot of videos of your opponent and thought this person crumbles under pressure eventually, so I got to keep it on. Right. And so in that context, aggressiveness as a priority value is workable. Because it leads to this decision tree of I need to be more active and I need to fuel this way and I need to hydrate this way and stuff like that. Yep. Yep. Yep. Right. But if we take that value out of the boxing ring, say to personal relationships, and it's applied at the same degree, somebody's going to get arrested. Yes. Yeah. That's bad, right? I mean, if you want to be a professional athlete, usually getting arrested doesn't help with things like sponsors. I don't know. The NFL doesn't seem to care sometimes. I know. Is it too soon? Not too soon enough? I don't know. Anyway, so bike racing. So bike racing. We want to help our athletes get clear on what the top of the tree is. What the value is when they're showing up to practice, what the value is when they're showing up to a race, what the value is when they just pulled their bike out of the garage and they're rolling with their friends. So by value, you don't mean just like, what are you going to get out of it? You mean like, what's your priority focus? Exactly. Right. Okay. And we use the term value to indicate a descriptor of action. So I use the example of aggressive. as a value. People might have values of sincere or exploratory or systematic. When it tends to be useful to keep values as descriptors of behaviors, then... We can apply any behavior to the values test. So in other words, if you're going to be coaching somebody who's going into a race, or if you're an athlete going into a race, you would probably want to think about like, oh, if I need to work on not spending so much time in the wind, my value is to sit in. Maybe, or you might value something like Development as an athlete. Oh, so that's an even bigger picture. Yeah, yeah, yeah. The tree doesn't stop at the event. Right. A while back we were talking about motivation and inner drives and all that kind of stuff. The more we can connect values on really, really broad scales. like across my life, I would like to represent this descriptor of action. The more likely your athlete is going to buy into it, not only for today, not only for this workout or this block, but they're going to buy into it for a career because that thing is important to them on a really fundamental level. And so then when it comes down to they're in the middle of a in the middle of a road race and they've been sitting in in the back for a while and they're like, oh, This isn't values consistent right now. I don't know if anybody's ever had that thought in a road race, but I get what you mean. Yeah, I mean, we're using the example of the person that's rigidly rule governed about staying out of the wind. That moment where they notice that what they're doing is not consistent with some broadly applicable value, it becomes really important to them to do something else. Yeah, that makes sense. really important. Do you have any strategies for people to focus on that kind of thing? Because some of the people I coach where I give them something to focus on going into a race, like you've been pretty aggressive a lot of the time. It's time to sit in and do your best to make the front selection or try to be in the top 10. And they lose focus halfway through. And actually, it's one of the things that I learned while coaching the MIT road squad is that as analytical as they have a reputation for being, because the joke in the ACCC is like, oh, did you aero test those gloves? Stuff like that. They made decisions as emotionally as anybody else that you would ever coach, and they're not on the bike. It's difficult to be that analytical. And you don't have to be that analytical. True. And they're not, for sure. And most people are. Although I think for more analytical people, just in my experience, time trials and solo events are a better way to go because you have more controllable factors. And a lot of people who have a hard time improvising don't do as well in mass start races. So when it comes to somebody who's got a hard time in mass start races, or somebody who's got a hard time focusing and gets emotional, what could we do to help them maintain focus for their long term development? That gets right to the meat of the issue right there. Does it? Oh yeah, yeah it does. And it's a question we can chase our entire careers. Oh, so I finally hit on the big drivers. I mean, if you could just roll out to a race and be like, okay, athlete, do this and you're going to be better. Syndicate that shit and make a bunch of money. I have a business proposal for you. To the best of our knowledge, the first step is acceptance. The first step is being like, okay, this is how my athlete responds in these situations historically. And I'm going to be accepting that that's likely to happen again. And so building an environment where the athlete can work with you from a place of accepting them for all strengths and weaknesses combined. is the good starting point. And then training within them, that ability to accept that it's not a light switch. They're not just going to go from challenge to perfect. They're never going to be perfect. It is a long, long process. And it is a lifelong process, I think. Totally is. And so accepting is the first step. And it's not this passive accepting of like, this is how it is and it's never going to change. But it's this active acceptance of like, Historically, I have responded this way in this context. So progress is going to be an incremental change away from it. Every time I've been dumped, right there, you got it. The next thing that you want, because ultimately you're saying, how do we get the athlete to try that thing that's different? Is have the athlete both, one, the athlete's the one that... has different values. If we as a coach project our values onto the athlete, they're not going to buy in because that's our shit, not their shit. The values clarification process, the process of discovering what each athlete makes important for themselves is really important. At the end of the day, once you have a rough set, you say, okay, what are the things that you can do? in these moments that might move you closer to those values that might be in service of those values. That sounds a lot like, you know, typically, physiologically, what we do is, you know, what's the athlete good at? How do we get them to be their best on like, what do they need for their event? And how do we get them there? This sounds like the psychological version of that. It absolutely is. These are your goals. This is where you're at now. We need to find the way between the two. We tend to be a little bit sensitive about using the word goals interchangeably with values because goals are finite things. They are steps along the way that can be achieved. Goals are win this race or have this watts per kilo. Yep. Whereas a value being a descriptor of action is an ongoing process. Today, I can be sincere. and tomorrow I might not be sincere and the next day I might be sincere again, but at no time have I completed the challenge of being sincere. Right. So values are this thing that's always guiding us, always providing a direction, but it's never achievable, but we can set goals on the path to that value in the direction of that value. It's sort of a Sisyphean task, but at the same time, you're not actually in one place. The scenery does change. Yeah. It's interesting that you call it a Sisyphean task because pursuit of values doesn't have to mean it feels good. It does feel like you are running in place a lot of the time, personally. Sometimes, yeah. And sometimes it can be really, really, really uncomfortable. That athlete that's always sat in because of the rule I have to sit in, it's not comfortable to get out and get into the wind. True. And so if they are committing themselves to act in a more valued way, which indicates they need to get out into the wind, it's not going to be a happy moment. It's going to be a very uncomfortable moment. Yeah. And every moment for a long time thereafter, as they try different ways to pursue their values, has an element of discomfort because they still have this rule. They might not be responding to it as much, but they still have it. And so a part of their voice in their head is saying, you have to be out of the wind, you have to be out of the wind, you have to be out of the wind. And another part of them is saying, in order to pursue this value, I need to put you. in a little corner over here and I need to do this other thing. And so it's going to be uncomfortable. I know you're going to keep saying that, but I'm going this way because it's important to me. Yeah. And so how do you get your athletes to do that? Put them in the driver's seat of clarifying their values and discovering ways in which they can act in accordance with their values. Oh, so it's the, it's. Kind of the opposite of the present evidence contrary to your opinion and somebody will, you know, you hope somebody will change their opinion and they don't, they bet in. This is, you know, what I was, anyway, I've read articles on this, haven't read the studies, but apparently if you bring someone along their own logic chain to, you know, it's easier to change their mind. Instead of just being like, this is the end goal or the end value you should have, just switch. Instead, it actually sounds like seeing a shrink. It's like, you've got this goal, why don't you tell me how you think it's going to get there and what behaviors have worked, what hasn't. It's almost like I do race analysis with people. It's like, what worked, what didn't? Like, what felt good, what didn't? Same as, like, you know, your first workout back after a rest week. Was this good or not? So we use the term workability all the time, but the challenge is to make sure that the criteria of workability is service of values. Wait, what's workability? Okay, what worked for you? Oh, I gotcha. And when you ask a question, what worked for you, the implied assessment is, in service of values. So if something resulted in movement towards a value, I can say that this behavior was definitely a values-aligned behavior. That worked. If the result was something that went away, I can say that this behavior resulted in taking me away from that value that I decided. That didn't work. And so the criteria of workability is a really, really beneficial criteria if you have clarity on what's important to you. Oh, I got you. Okay. Yeah. If the assessment criteria of workability is applied to something else, like somebody else's values or some number, that's where we start to get problems with rules. Oh, see, now it's all coming back together. Yeah. I like this. Yeah. And that part that you said about it sounds like you're going to see a shrink? Yes. All of this, everything that we've talked about has come out of a single theory of how behavior changes. Which is what theory? Operant behavior. I mean, I know the word operant, but what is operant behavior? Well, operant theory is that... Our behavior changes because of contact with consequences. Oh, yes. I mean, what other? Oh, God, I'm going to. Don't worry about it. I shouldn't ask. Don't worry about it. What other theories? I won't worry. Let's just focus on the goal here. Operant theory is that contact with consequences affects our behavior. Language, verbal behavior, what we talked about before, has a weird way of. bringing us into contact or out of contact with certain consequences. And so what we're doing as coaches is we are describing consequences or we are sensitizing our athletes to notice consequences in particular occasions. And so the workability criteria. is to establish a sensitivity to consequences, whether it worked or not, in alignment with our values, such that the athlete's behavior is affected by workability. Right. So this actually sounds a lot like stuff that most coaches probably do. Yeah. on some level or another, like subconsciously without even knowing that we're doing it. Absolutely. And I assume that in your coaching practice, you're a lot more aware of this kind of stuff. So who would you say your ideal client would be to perfectly fit your strengths as a coach? That's a weird question, right? That is a strange question. Because I wouldn't even know how to answer it. Yeah, I mean, I don't want this to sound classist or anything, but I don't have the experience to work with clients that are not vocally verbal, unfortunately, or don't speak English. I'm not multilingual. I don't have experience working with nonverbal clients. Is that common? I don't know. In my world of training, since most of my cohort in grad school is working with individuals with developmental disabilities, there is a lot of consideration for multimodal communication and working around communicative challenges. When I think about what athletes am I going to pursue as potential clients, I take into consideration whether I can have a basic shared language with them. So that's something to actually consider for people coaching para-athletes. Interesting. Yeah. Yeah. People that are coaching para-athletes myself, like people on, you know, BVI tandem kind of stuff. And it's, it's, it's a different thing. It's like, how do you deliver training plans to somebody who cannot read Training Peaks? Exactly. This takes us all the way back to the beginning of the conversation. You have to go through a very explicit, conscious effort to build a shared language with them since you don't have the shared experience. asking people about their experience and figuring out how do I make this work between us. Exactly. Which is, yeah, and actually one of the guys I worked with, every week I was going to email him, Monday, this is your workout. Tuesday, this is your workout. Like long verbal descriptors instead of, you know, my usual like number shorthand for a lot of things. Okay, so. Honestly, sorry, you're just bringing up a lot of memories. Between undergrad and grad school, I worked as an entry-level tech person for a library company. And I did a bunch of accessibility work for them. And so I had to work with these automated tools that would go through their website and be like, this is not accessible, this is not accessible. And by accessibility, I mean, usable for somebody who's using a screen reader software or using a Braille output or something like that. Yeah, yeah. And so I constantly find myself thinking about like, how could we make these? How can we make this material more accessible to people who don't speak English, who don't have the same visual capacities, who are working on alternative methods of interacting with remote communication? I wish I could see more of that. And one day, I hope my services really support that accessibility. Yeah. Well, that's, I mean, that's, you know, I kind of asked that weird question, but I kind of like where this has gone because that's something that I had a potential client. who was visually impaired. That's his work. That's his job. I think he was in a car accident and he lost his sight. I thought that that was a great thing for somebody like that to do is you've got this experience and you can now take your precise lived experience to help others in a similar situation. I think it's interesting that you went there because you've got such such a different experience than me because everybody who contacts me and Empirical Cycling for coaching, like they either reading articles or listening to the podcast and, you know, speak English. I've never had, well, once somebody who was like, hey, I kind of speak some English, but I primarily speak Italian. You have a coach who speaks Italian and I happen to have a coach who speaks Italian. Fabiano is multilingual, smart guy that he is. And I was like, this is perfect. But yeah, I've never really considered that. I mean, I think that's, is that privilege? I'm not exactly sure what that counts. Yeah, that totally counts as privilege. We know the dominant language and we have the widest availability of sensory interactions with the world. Yeah, and it is. And it's really cool when people who are working with different ability levels. work as the bridge, but we shouldn't make them the go-to person to have to do that work. There's so many more of us that could easily do things like make our coaches page readable for a screen reader by using heading formatting. Not like serious hard work as much as just simple stuff that would make our materials more accessible to those people who are differently abled. Yeah, that makes a lot of sense. And I had a follow up and I completely forgot what it was. So I'm just gonna ask you my last question here, which is, what do you blank? I don't even know the word to use. Like, what's your feedback? Or what advice would you have even? Or how would you explain the disappointment that people deal with? after a race. Uh, cause I bet we could actually do, we're at an hour 20. Um, I bet we could probably do another like two hours just on this. Um, but you know, maybe we'll expand on this for another podcast. Um, but what, um, you know, how do you deal with that? Right. Cause I think it's part and parcel to bike racing, isn't it? I mean, I think it's part and parcel to challenging ourselves to do anything. So just being alive. Yeah, because we're not going to, most anything, we're not going to even do well the first time. And the thousandth time, we're probably still not going to live up to our own expectations. And so there is going to be some discomfort. And I think it goes right back to what we were talking about earlier of be accepting. Be accepting of ourselves and the fact that we are not machines. We will always literally language makes it so that we can always see opportunity and possibility. Well, hold on. Why is language do that? Because we can talk about. We can talk to ourselves about there and then. And so we can talk to ourselves about in the future, I will be faster in the future. I will be stronger. Or in the past, I could have done this thing better. Is that a language thing or is that just like a conceptual human thing? It's a language thing. At least in my field of study, it's totally a language thing. Responding to temporal relations is totally a language thing. But because of that, it makes misery only one step away. It makes discomfort only ever one step away, or at least awareness of that. It only takes one thought, one stimulus, one whatever to bring to mind the possibilities. And a lot of what we experience as far as like post-race discomfort is being like, oh, I could have done that better. I could have done this better. I could have been a little faster here. I could have been a little more aggressive here. I could have held off there. I think I may have burned too many matches here. It's revisiting. these opportunities that we mark as lost. And so the first skill is we're going to do that. Like we're too good at that not to do it. So we need to practice being accepting of that dialogue within us. And saying, this is what I will do better next time. Don't even have to. No? Don't even have to do the, this is what I'll be better next time. We can just say, okay, I'm going to review this race and it's going to be uncomfortable. and if you do want to follow it up with anything, you might want to follow up with what is the thing that's important to me that's spurring on this discomfort? A little more values clarification. Usually I didn't get the result I expected because I think that's part of bike racing that everybody lines up and you think if I'm just a little smarter than everybody else, I can win or I can be on the podium. Yeah, so why is it important to win? Remember, values are bigger than the bike race. Usually we're feeling discomfort emotionally because there's a dissonance between what we experience and what we hope to pursue, what's meaningful to us. Yeah. And so we can, sometimes discomfort is just discomfort because we learn to be uncomfortable in that situation. And in that case, we just say, okay, I learned to respond this way, period, end of statement, moving on. That just acceptance of like, yeah, this is a normal and natural response and a reflection of my history. In other cases, discomfort is a signal that there's something valuable to us within the experience. And so diving into it and saying, not just at this bike race, not just in this training block, but in my life, in the context of being an athlete or being a significant other or being a student or whatever the context is, what is the thing that's important to me that I feel like I could have done better on? Yeah. But first step is acceptance. Because it's going to happen. So speaking of acceptance, actually not really, that's a terrible transition. I was going to say, you know, one of the things that I thought it would be cool to talk about while you're here is one of the studies that you're in the middle of right now. So you had said to me, well, you had, you had, you know, you had DM me a couple weeks or actually maybe months. And you said, I'm looking for. High Level Athletes. What was your criteria for it? Collegiate or above. Collegiate or above. So like, so what do you mean collegiate? I mean collegiate like individuals that are playing not on like club teams, but like varsity. Like a junior varsity. Junior varsity or varsity. Or they're getting a scholarship to be there because they're an athlete. Yeah. So that's collegiate or. in terms of like USA Cycling categories, like maybe two and above, something like that, or like with a certain level of experience. And so you were asking if I knew any of these people to participate in a study that is simple. It's nice. It's survey based. And it was what, two or three surveys? It's three surveys. You take the same survey three times, spaced out by a week each. So it takes about 10, maybe 15 minutes. It's online. You take the survey, you wait a week, you take the survey, you wait a week, you take the survey, you're done. Okay, so easy peasy. And the most fascinating thing that you said about that was that you're doing this because if you give your normal survey to athletes, speaking of high functioning, they look like everything is sunshine and puppies across the board. And at least statistically, that cannot be true. And experientially, we know that athletes are dealing with depression, anxiety, the whole host of normal stuff that everybody deals with, but these surveys don't catch it. And so you're working on developing something that will actually do that, right? Exactly. Yeah, there's a Swedish team that we've partnered up with and they actually developed this survey in Sweden, validated it with professional hockey players in Sweden. And then when they went to the publisher and said, we did this thing, the publisher was like, cool, our main audience is in English. And so you need to write it in English and you need to publish a survey in English. And they're like, but the survey was written in Swedish. And we were talking about shared languages. And this goes both ways, like their survey. is not validated in the English translation right now. And the previous surveys that we're talking about as being insensitive to athlete populations, they rely on a shared language of individuals seeking clinical help. Oh, I see. So differentiate between what you do and clinical. Okay. So the... The term clinical usually specifies that somebody has achieved some level of licensure. And depending on country or depending on state, it's either nationally or state level regulated. What I do currently, currently, I'm a PhD student. I'm getting close to graduation, but I'm a PhD student. And my career pursuit is... non-clinical applications, working with people that are not seeking help for mental health issues, but they're seeking coaching on effectively improving their performance. It's because it's the same coin, but one is suffering. We talked about rigid rule of government behavior because they're following the rules so much and so inflexibly. They've reached a level of suffering. But at the same time, somebody might not have the skills to move them from being moderately competitive to very competitive. And that's the area that I work in. Same skills that can move somebody from suffering to successful. And I just focus on those individuals who want to move from competitive to very competitive. So are you still looking for people for your study? Absolutely. Yes. Well, all right. So how do people get in touch with you for this? Okay. So they can email me at Patrick at coachpatricsmith.com. Cool. That's the simplest way to reach me. They can also reach me at my university email at patricksatnevada.unr.edu. All right. I'll put those in the show notes too. Yeah. Either of those email addresses will get to me and I can send the recruiting material and they can read the whole informed consent and everything and choose whether they want to participate or not. And if somebody's wondering if they can participate or not, they should just email you and just see, this is the level I compete at. Do I qualify? Absolutely. And especially you're looking for, I bet, females, because I bet men are just like, you know, you've got plenty of men, but you're really looking for women, right? Oh, no, I want, I would like both. Both. Okay. Because we have just as... Statistically, we probably have more female athletes than male athletes, depending on which sport you're looking at. Oh, that's I never would have expected that. Like we talk about cycling and cycling is a male dominated sport, but there's sports out there that are not male dominated. Oh, you're right. Yeah, yeah. So we need to get a good if we want to make the statistical argument that our data is representative of elite athletes in general. We want to get participants across the sport spectrum, across the gender identity spectrum, across the age spectrum, within the limits of adults. Our institutional review board limits us to adults 18 and over. Is there a chance that you'll find differences between sports? Or is that not... I assume that would be like a later part of the study, like once this gets validated, then you give it to different sports and see the differences possibly? Yes, that is definitely a later part. Because this comes out of this theory of language, right now we're just looking at there's such a different shared language between non-athlete populations seeking clinical help and athlete populations seeking clinical help. We speak different ways about things like discomfort. that when we give a clinical assessment tool to an athlete, they're responding honestly, but the way the tool assesses them is insensitive to their experience. I talked about working with CrossFitters. That was where we got the first real data that this was going on. When I was an undergrad, when I first got recruited into researching, I spent every morning, 5 o'clock in the morning, walking to our local gym and surveying every single CrossFitter. Across the board, they scored amazing. Sunshine and roses. We've already talked about it. You don't have a community that has Uncle Rab and everybody's healthy. And that's not to talk poorly about CrossFitters, but it just goes to show that our language is a reflection of our social community. And surveys, especially self-report surveys, rely on a shared language in order to be sensitive to suffering. And so athletes in general across sports are showing this different... responses, linguistic responses to concepts like pain and discomfort and unworkability. And so we're trying to build the tools that can help us better be sensitive to those populations, because actually we talked about like you talked about like anxiety, depression, body dysmorphia, all the kind of mental health conditions that we think of as being the same as other populations. In reality, it's worse. Athletes have a higher incidence of depression, anxiety, body dysmorphia disorders. And does worse also include these are harder cases? I would not. People suffer like deeper, I guess. I'm making that statement. No, no, no. It's a good question. And I'm making that statement specific to frequency of incidence. Gotcha. Okay. Yeah. That makes sense. If you are an individual. It's like weight is such a premium that they had to, as far as I know, they had to regulate a minimum body weight. You cannot be lighter than this. I wrote about this in my master's thesis, but the thing is sport is defined by rules. It's literally who can be the best at optimizing within rules. What we're talking about is if rules get too rigid, if optimization gets too extreme, and then it gets applied to other contexts, it stops working, and people start suffering. I say this all the time about physiology stuff. It's like somebody learns something, and I've done it too. I'm not immune from this. So have I. I researched this stuff, and I've done it too. Yeah, so it's like... You learn something, or I learn something, and I think, oh, this explains so much, but now I have overextended the explanation. I have gone from interpolating to extrapolating, and I don't know what's out there. Finally, after years of just reading never-ending amounts of papers, Now I can read something and I think, oh, this kind of fits in here, but I have so many questions, I actually feel like I'm filled with more doubt than answers a lot of the time. Somebody will ask me a question and in one of the Discord servers I'm on, somebody, I don't think it's an actual bot, but somebody has the Coley It Depends bot. That is such a compliment. I suppose. I like to think that I am some kind of an expert because I know the context of it depends. But at the same time, I actually feel like it's a cop out in some ways because it's like, this seems like something somebody should know. And I'd like to know it and I don't. Or maybe I can just be like, aha, it depends, which really means I'm pretending to be an expert on this one. I'm not. So I have this, this, this goes into that dark place where you were talking about flamethrowers and candles. Oh, God. I have this metaphor as far as knowledge. Making knowledge, learning things is like walking into a room that doesn't have any lights and laying the finest trail of glow in the dark liquid. That trail will tell you the path that you have traveled, but it doesn't illuminate much beyond it. Right. And so as you travel different paths, you're going to get a more and more intricate trail. but it's so finite that just a small deviation and you're back in the dark it's sort of like it reminds me of I read that book on infinity from David Foster Wallace because I am a huge nerd and a lit snob apparently and he talked about a metaphor somebody had for – actually, I think it was in this book. I'm not entirely sure anymore. A metaphor somebody had for the number of rational numbers versus the number of irrational numbers. So if you take the entire number line and you put a red handkerchief over every rational number, it would still be – like you would still see no red because there are so many irrational numbers. Yes. Set theory gives a lot of insight into just how impossible it is for us to ever describe everything. Because everything is infinite and way beyond what we can encapsulate in our minds, much less in our language. We're getting right back to Kurt Godel again. Yeah, I know. This is something that has been discussed across many academics and philosophy and things like that. But the close experience that you're having of like, I don't know, is because you have made a very, very intricate web of where you've been and what you've experienced and how you fit everything together. I talk about it like fitting puzzle pieces together and having infinitely smaller pieces of the puzzle or larger, who knows? It's some kind of fractal thing like that where there's puzzle pieces missing and I don't know how big or small they are. Maybe nobody knows. Maybe I just haven't read the right book or read the right paper or it'll just always be a question mark or maybe it's even the wrong question. I'm sorry. I'm frustrated myself with just talking about it. No, you're totally right. So my advisor gives this lecture about the majority of research that you'll ever do will have almost no impact. Oh, that is dark. No, no, no. Statistically, in academia, we have this eye index. Wait, is this the publish or die thing I've heard about? Yeah, publish or perish? Yeah. So one of the measures of publication is how many times it's been cited. Yes. And if you have one paper and it has been cited once, you get an eye score of one. And if you have two papers and each one has been cited once, you still only have an eye score of one. It's not until you have two papers that have each been cited twice that you get an eye score of two. Gotcha. And on and on and on and on and on. And the modal I score in academia. Okay, it's going to be like 1.2, isn't it? It's zero. Oh. Yeah. The majority of research that's ever published will never be cited. 

So do we have too many PhDs in this world? Or wait, we're about to get into a totally different discussion. It's not that, but you're talking about like all these questions of like, is it the right question? Am I asking it the right way? Is it useful for me now? These are all criteria that we should be applying to before we even do research. But most people just come across a question and do research. And so in the infinite possibilities of knowledge that can be described, the majority of those descriptions, they never thought about, does this do anything more than help me in my academic career? And I'm not saying it's a bad thing. Or they thought, is this interesting to me? And so because of that, it has a really, really limited impact. The thing my advisor says when he's giving this lecture of modal citation number is zero is pick your research, pick your questions very carefully. Ask those questions that are not only meaningful to you, but meaningful to others. And so when you find yourself in this place of like, I don't know, should I be asking this question? Your workability criteria should be something along the lines of how many other people are going to be benefited from me asking this question? Because I have a finite amount of resources that I can put towards my expertise. And there's an infinite amount of knowledge. So how do I appropriate my time and my effort such that others? are benefited. I actually had that experience very early in my coaching career. I was just trying to get clients because I had started coaching a couple of friends. I said to one of my other friends, I was like, hey, why don't I coach you? She said, well, why should I work with you? I said, well, I know all this, that, and the other thing about metabolism and physiology. She goes, okay, well, how does that help you be a better coach? I floundered. I had no idea. And that was what started me on the path of like, every time I see a paper, I like skim it and I go, is this applicable to anything? And I have in my head like a little filing cabinet of this is something I know that I don't think is applicable, but I'm always looking for a reason to use it, like for a way to make it relevant. And there's a lot of stuff that I'm sure will never be relevant. Yeah. Yeah. And yet we still go out there because it's important to us. It's meaningful to us to fill the role of expert, to enable others to achieve beyond where they are right now. Yeah. Well, I think your current research is going to be... is important to others, and I'm glad you're doing it. And if anybody listening to this podcast, I just remembered we're doing a podcast. I kept forgetting that we're recording this. I believe at the beginning you said, relax, it's just a conversation amongst friends. I'm glad we got there. Me too. Me too. That's why I started us rolling in the middle of everything. I'll preamble, I'll postamble, I'll do all the things. So if anybody wants to be part of Patrick's research, just reach out. Check out the show notes, reach out to him, and you can be part of making – what are we making better for athletes in the future? Psychological evaluation? We're approving – we're addressing a gap in sensitivity for clinical help-seeking. And so when athletes go in to get help, you would say, do you need this? Questionnaire, or do you need this one to be evaluated? Because it seems like if a lot of people went in right now to get help for depression or anxiety, a lot of athletes, somebody would look at their results and say, oh, you're doing fine. It'd be like giving a sprinter an FTP test. We have assessment tools, but the tool has to be appropriate to the client. Yeah, so if we ask Harry Levresen, what's your FTP? And he might know, but is he going to tell you if it matters? So that makes perfect sense. Yeah. Yeah. All right. Well, thank you for coming on. Thank you for having me. Okay, everybody, thank you all for listening. That was a great episode, I think. Well, I had fun recording it anyway. And again, if you want to participate in that study, head over to empiricalcycling.com under the podcast episodes that will bring you to the show notes. And you can contact Patrick from there if you want, or you heard his email. You can just shoot him an email. Also, if you are in need of a coach or a consultation on your training, now is a really good time. It is currently fall here in the Northern Hemisphere. you can shoot me an email at empiricalcycling at gmail.com or if you want to just catch up on social media ask some questions in the Instagram stories that's at empiricalcycling if you want to donate to the ad free podcast you can do so at empiricalcycling.com slash donate and I will see you all in the next episode bye 