Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Cole Moore. Thank you, everybody, for listening. And if you are new here and you like what you're hearing, please consider subscribing so you can hear more of the podcast. And if you are a returning listener, I assume most of you are, thanks so much for coming back. We really appreciate having you back. And if you'd like to support the podcast because you are coming back and enjoying it, you can always do some word of mouth and share it with a friend or share it on a forum. Thank you so much for all of that. We really, really appreciate it. If you would like to support the podcast with a couple bucks, that keeps the lights on, and that can be done at empiricalcycling.com slash donate. And if you would like to really, really support the podcast, you can always reach out for coaching or consultation at empiricalcycling at gmail.com and get a conversation started and see if it's right for you or see if, you know, see if you want to keep coaching yourself, we can consult, we can look at your files. Et cetera, et cetera. It's really never a bad time to get started with a coach if you are thinking about it or even just wondering. So if you have any... questions for the podcast in the future. That's where we got a couple questions at the end of this episode, as usual. Follow me on Instagram, at Empirical Cycling, and check the stories, because that's where I'm going to post all of where we do the questions. And I also do a weekend AMA up in the stories, too. And so if you want to follow along for that, if you want to ask a question, you are always welcome to join. So today's episode was kind of the genesis of an argument between my friend Marinus and I. He listened to the last WhatsApp doc, and he decided that he had a bone to pick with my interpretation of some of those studies. And we kind of went back and forth a long time privately, and we decided, you know, this would be fun to do a podcast on, but I also wanted to make it constructive. So we kind of get into some of our disagreements on the last WhatsApp doc a little bit, but we also get into kind of what We found is really our fundamental difference between our training philosophies, which actually end up being fairly similar. So we discuss the benefits and drawbacks of different ways to quantify training load. And we look at hours, we look at kilojoules, and we look at TSS. And these are things that people are probably familiar with, but we kind of go through them anyway. And we kind of look at ways that they are good and bad, and Marinus has particular ways of defining certain things. And we kind of talk about fatigue, we talk about the upsides and downsides of using these things, you know, kind of at different intensity ranges and how to manage that. And at the end of the day, we all, you know, obviously everybody's friends. And this is a really interesting discussion. We are mostly on topic at times, as usual for us. We are not. I hope everybody is okay with that. And yeah, if you want to reach out and give us a comment on that, we'd welcome that, of course. And so, yeah, so here's my conversation with Marinus Petersen about quantifying training volume. You are one of the few people who's willing to tell me that something I said is bullshit. Like to my face. And I really appreciate that about you. So, and you thought in the last podcast that we did on volume versus intensity, let's see, which one was that? Wattstock 49. You thought my interpretation of the main study in there was a little ambitious. Is that a good way to put it? Yeah, I just thought you extrapolated. Far beyond what the actual study was saying. And from my perspective, slightly misinterpreted it as well, from how I would have interpreted it. I mean, and this is something that's actually very common among, you know, if we can call ourselves experts, or at least as expert as we can be, it's very common to have these kinds of disagreements. And so I actually really appreciated when you wrote me, you texted me and you were like, This was wrong, this was wrong, this was wrong. And I was like, okay, first of all, come on the podcast. Let's talk this out like men. But also, I tried to make it explicit in that podcast about what parts of it were in my coaching experience, because if we draw a line from that study to my coaching experience, that's where my recommendations came from. And my recommendations also have a lot of... Practical Implications, and not just scientific and, you know, mechanism, adaptation, blah, blah, blah based. But I think that it's still going to be really cool to kind of discuss this a little bit, because fundamentally, what you and I have been discussing is like, what's the best way to quantify training volume in relation to all practical aspects of training, volume, and intensity? You know, the practical ways and, you know, logical conclusions of how to look at like TSS and hours and the way you prefer to do it is kilojoules. So why don't we start with your main criticisms of the study and kind of where you feel I got it wrong and where your interpretation of the study is more correct. Okay. Two main points that I disagreed with. First of all, your conclusion from that study seemed to be that adaptation and consequent stimulus is directly proportional to the total hours of training. Whereas I went to look at the actual graph and the units of training load, when you actually look at how they've calculated that, it's much more like it's kind of the product that increases linearly with intensity times duration. So basically work done, which is what I understand to be what drives the adaptation for sub-LT1 work. Although interestingly with this study it's also including intensity above LT1 work and we can discuss why kilojoules doesn't work for that later on. So that was my first disagreement with your interpretation. Secondly, then, because this is something I really ask myself a lot, both when I'm thinking about my own really long rides and when I'm programming my own for my clients, how much do you really need and how do you find that balance of the right amount of volume? So your interpretation from this study was that you know there's a linear relationship in these studies that we've got therefore indefinitely more volume is better and there doesn't appear to be any plateau in adaptation once you reach a certain point. So I then went to look at because I thought there aren't really that many people in the world elite athletes training 30 plus hours a week so there can't really be many studies looking at that effect. Very few. Indeed, when I went to look at the studies, and in fact, I was quite shocked to find that the highest volume training load by this calculated measure... Just by hours? No, no, so the highest training load, so not by hours... And the arbitrary units, yeah. And in their arbitrary unit, the highest training load, I then went and said, okay, what are these people actually doing? And the people in that study were doing five hours... Five hours a week of what was kind of maybe like tempo sweet spot. So just kind of, you know. On average, I assume it was like threshold sweet spot. Yeah. Yeah. So let's just say it's like doing five hours a week of sweet spot. But that's all you're doing. That's all they were doing. So they were doing trainer road. So they were doing, yes, they were doing your trainer road. But if you think that they were the people doing the most. So then my. Where I disagree with your interpretation is, you cannot therefore then say that because in this, you know, from like basically zero to five hours a week of sweet spot, that there is linear relationship between kilojoules, TSS hours, you know, any of the above, that indefinitely more there is a linear relationship to more, you know, better outcomes. in terms of endurance adaptations. And that's where I leaned on my coaching experience, because in my coaching experience, I have hard data to show that the more somebody rides regardless of the intensity, the better the fatigue resistance. And that's really where I was drawing a lot of that, because as I've said on the podcast many times before, when we are looking at how do we shortcut if somebody doesn't have a lot of volume, we can do some middle intensity. And actually, if you look at the intensity, versus a chart for adaptation. What they were looking at is it's flat across the board on the average, but it's actually an arc where it actually goes up in the middle, where the highest... God, I should have pulled it up in front of me, but you know exactly the one I'm talking about. Well, Andy Coggins' kind of chart where it says, like, it's got, like, the tick boxes and, like, one to three ticks for each, like, kind of intensity zone, what you... It looks, yeah, it looks kind of like that, yeah. So I think, yeah, so you're saying that that middle intensity zone is, you're accumulating a lot of more kilojoules per unit time, so you can potentially get, like... You know, in the same unit of time, yeah, you're getting more endurance type adaptations, but then linking back to our AMPK episode, you're also getting some kind of other type of high intensity type. Related. Yeah. Oh, yeah. It was citrate synthase activity. That's right. Yeah. So this is figure 2D. So the relationship is more or less flat, but around 70% exercise intensity of Wmax, like 60 to 80%, which is the range for LT2 or threshold or MLSS or FTP, blah, blah, blah, in relationship to VO2max, like for the average population is 60 to 80%. So, of course, that's where we get. the highest bang for the buck for training. And so that's exactly reflected in, you know, the Coggin arc or like the, was it the, that Fast Cat kind of, you know, thing with the training zones and the arc of adaptation, like it all looks pretty much the same. And it, you know, and that's, that's where that equivalence, you know, originally comes from, I think. Yeah. So, but you're right that exactly what they were doing was, basically looking at kilojoules. And so why don't we just dig into that? Because really our thing is, let's figure out what's the best way to quantify training volume. So let's just dig into kilojoules because, you know, and I asked us to make a list of pros and cons for each, but My list, actually, I sucked at breaking things out into pros and cons, because as soon as I made a point, I was like, well, this could also be a con, too. So, here's one reason I like to look at kilojoules, or I would like to look at kilojoules, even though in practice I do it not nearly as often as you do. It's easy to quantify. It's really easy to quantify, like a monkey can do it. It's objective, yeah. It's completely objective. Yeah. I mean, the benefits of an easy metric like this are simplicity. I mean, what else do you got here? Well, I think actually that's kind of, I don't think it is, compared to ours, for most people seem to find it a lot less simple and a lot more confusing, and I think that's the only reason it's not embraced more as a training load metric. As if TSS is any simpler. That's the irony for me. If you head out the door to say, I'm going to do a 3,000 kilojoule ride, that's harder to process, whereas you say, I'm just going to go out and I'm going to do four hours. Whereas for people to both plan ahead, for athletes and coaches, hours is more simplistic. Whereas kilojoules, in my opinion, from my understanding, is what's actually driving the adaptation. So, for all that sub-LT1 work. Whereas where we come into problems is that people think, oh, okay, so if you ride harder, that means it's better, so you always want to ride as hard as you can. And that's where you then run into problems, that would be kind of your con of kilojoules, because if you interpret that the wrong way, Then that can mean either that your endurance rides are no longer endurance rides, because if you're riding over LT1, and all the associated problems you get with that, or then, but then also, even if you are riding under LT1, and you've got, you know, more than what should we say, Cole, 15 hours, 20 hours train a week, if you're trying to pin it even right close, but still below LT1, it's still not going to work, and you're not going to be able to do it. And especially once you get as strong as you are and like, you know, other professional cyclists, you burn so many kilojoules like that. I mean, like an average endurance ride for you is probably between like 4,000 and 5,000 kilojoules and like there's no way that you can really make yourself whole on a ride like that. Well, no, I wouldn't say that's the problem because if you can achieve, doing more kilojoules is Kind of the objective. But you want to do as many kilojoules as you can whilst minimizing the fatigue. And the way to do that is not, as most people would interpret it, okay, ride harder. It's actually easier. It's like to ride longer and ride easier because then you can get more kilojoules done and be less fatigued so that you can either do even more kilojoules or the same amount of kilojoules the next day and the next day. And then when it comes to your hard intensity sessions, you're fresher. because there's less neuromuscular fatigue generated from riding closer to LT1. So yes, LT1 does represent this kind of threshold above which you're going to kind of cause this autonomic disturbance, which you don't want. But still, there is an increase in fatigue from zero watts up to LT1. So if you can achieve the same total amount of kilojoules by riding like 50, 100 watts easier to get the same effect, that's going to be much less fatiguing. And then feeding back to what you said about actually putting those calories back in. Say your gut can only tolerate so many carbohydrates per hour. So if you're eating 90 grams of carbohydrates and you're riding at 200 watts, then you're covering much closer to your energy. That would be more than your carbohydrate expenditure, endurance pace, and closer to your energy expenditure than if you're riding at 300 watts. So then there's like a much bigger delta, but your gut can still only tolerate so much per unit time. Well, it's built on that point. I actually think that the recovery time to make your body whole again is still somewhat significant, even if you're somebody who's got a 300-watt FTP. and riding at like 150 watts, like it can take a decent amount of time to make the adaptations that your body wants to make. It can take some time to restock your glycogen stores and it can take some time to, you know, reset yourself like autonomically, as you say. And so, and so kind of on the other side of that, regardless, you, I think about needing recovery time. No matter what. I mean, no matter how hard or easy you kind of go on a ride, no matter what the kilojoules are, you're going to need some time to stop exercising and kind of make yourself whole again. And actually, that's one of the things that I think is a drawback for hours, is if you're just looking at hours, one of the drawbacks is that if you think more hours is better, you start to cut into your recovery days. Yeah. And you really need to keep those recovery days sacred. Like, fuck not with your recovery days, because if you are exercising a little hard in your recovery days, like that can cause a lot of problems. And I'm sure that's something that you work with all of your clients on a lot, like we do with ours. Yeah, like if you just start thinking, tap on another two hours at 100 watts on my recovery days, because that's an extra two hours it's going to do something. Yeah, I've had more than one client with like a 400 plus watt FTP. And on their recovery days, they'll do like 150 watts, but they'll do it until they hit 1000 kilojoules. It's just because they want to eat more something. And I mean, I'm all for eating more and I'm all for, you know, that kind of thing. But it's a little much, you know, and no matter how many times I would chide them about, please don't do this. just kept doing it anyway. And I was like, this is going to lead you to burnout. And guess what? Burnout. Yeah, well, I think that's where like kilojoules could almost be useful in terms of like have a cap on how many kilojoules you can do on your recovery ride. Well, if somebody's willing to accept the cap. Yeah, if you just make the cap a bit lower, make it 700, 600. I tried to negotiate any way I could with those folks. And it's still, it's really hard to get anywhere because Actually, hold on. Before we dig too far to that, I actually want to keep pounding on kilojoules for a second. Keep focused. I know. This is our usual conversational style. One of the reasons I do like kilojoules, though, is because I do find that in a ride, just one ride, the kilojoules burned, let's say it's like a two or three hour ride, kilojoules burned will have a more direct correlation. to your muscular adaptation than pretty much any other metric. Precisely, yeah. Because how many mechanisms of adaptation, how many pathways do we have where more is more? It's like we've got AMPK, we've got the CAMK calcium pathway, we've got sirtuins and electron transport chain and redox balance. We've got, if we want to look at We haven't looked at this in the Wattstock episodes yet, but we will. If you want to look at capillary formation and higher flow rates and shear stress, that will lead to more. And if you want to go for really high intensity, now we're inducing hypoxia inducible factor and VEGF and all that kind of stuff. Yeah, but we're talking about endurance rides. I know, but just in a vacuum, more is more is a very common interpretation I've seen among people who... just kind of look at the literature in a cursory manner without thinking about the practical implications and the coaching and training implications of what's in the literature. But yeah, so I think the key point is that like training is, you know, it's a disturbance from your homeostasis, something changing in your physiology to cause something to happen. And none of these events care about how long you're sat on a bicycle with your Garmin recording. They care about, you know, the energy flux through the muscle or, you know, what's nice with it. The magnitude of cellular energy turnover. Well, because everything leans on. Yeah, well, you're right, because everything, and this is something I've really harped on in the podcast, everything starts with energy state. It starts with utilization of ATP and creation of ADP and AMP. Yeah, that's what. All the adaptations depend on. It doesn't depend on how long you sat on your bicycle. All the adaptations don't directly depend on that. Because, let's say, if you are as well-trained as you are, and you go out and do an eight-hour ride at 200, 250 watts, which is pretty chill for you, you are going to be maintaining that ATP homeostasis very well, but you still have all the other things. happening to maintain it that cause adaptation signal to like, you know, like calcium and, you know, redox balance and stuff like that. Yeah, and my point is that all of that is directly proportional to, you know, to the total work done, and it's not directly proportional to the total time. Because if you've got, you know, if you're riding a higher power output, then you've got You know, more, that's more energy per unit time, so in the same time it's more total energy. You've got more calcium having to be released from the sarcoplasmic reticulum to make more contractions, to make a bigger contraction to produce more, to produce more force. Well, if we're looking at all the motor units like as a whole, yeah, sure. Yeah, which is, which is what we're, which is what you're doing. Sometimes. I mean, well, this actually goes back to the point that we've both made about riding easier on your long days leaves more energy for your harder days because if you ride a little too hard on your long ride, then you get to your threshold days when you are recruiting larger motor units or even higher than that. Now you've got less energy for that because your muscles, those motor units are already tired or you're autonomically tired. You can't. Have as high quality a session as possible. And so that's actually going to rob you of adaptations for the harder efforts. Yeah, yeah. Which brings me on to a small point, which was a small difference between where we think, and this is something that I'm not sure of, but I'm kind of speculating about, is that if you're always doing your endurance rides. You know, incredibly easy, like miles below your FTP, then are you actually going to get all those peripheral adaptations into all the Type I slow-twitch fibers that you want? Because, you know, whereas if you ride, you know, at least do some amount of riding, you know, at least a bit closer to your LT1, then you're going to be recruiting, you know, closer to all of yours. Fast Twitch, your Slow Twitch Fibers. And this is, you know, going into your, what you'll hear at Inigo San Milan talking about how you want to have the rev limiter on the max because you want to maximize the recruitment of all these slow twitch fibers. Now, where that argument also kind of falls apart is that, or what it doesn't take into account is that, is this also dependent on exercise duration? So, like, from my friend, Paddy Harrison, a PhD in Loughborough, some of what his research went into is how motor unit recruitment changes with exercise duration. Oh, the slow component, yeah. They did, yeah, so like two, no, no, no, but a two-hour endurance ride versus a five-hour endurance ride. And so what they find is that actually in the five-hour endurance ride towards the end, you're actually starting to actually get into Type II fibres. So in what is still under LT1, like as you begin to fatigue, you recruit increasingly bigger motor units. So this is perhaps another reason that we find that short, easy endurance rides, once you're well trained, are not going to do as much. I would say... Perhaps by doing that, you don't have to do... Perhaps you don't have... You can do all your endurance rides. Miles below your LT1 and get the adaptations into all the Type I fibers that you want, provided you're going long enough. Whereas if you're more time-restricted and you can't do beyond a two- or three-hour ride, at some point to get into all those fast, slow-twitch fibers progressing the intensity is going to work. I would say yes and no. So on the last point you made there, I would say that's where I would want to keep the endurance ride school because very practically speaking, a lot of people don't ride that easy for their easy rides. No, no. That's somewhere to start. The main takeaway. Well, because it's also in relation to LT1 rather than FTP. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So that's probably a drawback of that particular philosophy is that If you are riding at like 50% of LT1, regardless of where FTP is, that's where I'd be like, okay, maybe that's a little easy, but are you doing 12 hours? Okay, probably good pace. If you are doing like three hours, you want to be, okay, if doing 80% of LT1 is like normal for you, okay, sure, bring it up to 100% and let's see how that adds to fatigue on your interval days. But I would personally... Rather have somebody do more high quality interval days and keep the easier rides. This is where it comes down to periodization because if you're in a VO2 max block. So you're saying everything depends? Oh my God. Yeah, yeah, exactly. So yeah, if you're in a VO2 max block or in a block of lots of racing, the last thing you want to start doing on your endurance rides, pinning them like within 20 watts of LT1, you want to just be Yeah, keeping them really hungry. Yeah, you want to keep the engine warm, as I say, but you don't want to be doing the Italian tune-up three times a week between races, because that's how you get burnout. Yeah, well, whereas if you're in earlier preparation phase, what I found has worked very well with a lot of my athletes, especially when time-restricted or even in smaller amounts, smaller proportions rather, People who are less time restricted is to just to do less days where we're doing any work at all over LT1. So quite often just one, you know, above one, one like, you know, interval day a week, one day we've got some work over LT1 and then just doing like proportion of riding right closer to it so that we can get, get more kilojoules in for the same total time endurance riding. Yeah, I'm sort of similar. Usually, I'd actually rather have somebody do one-ish interval day between a lot of races, but also when they're doing their endurance riding, I want them riding nice and easy. And I'd rather somebody do a little more volume, if possible, and easier, just because I just don't want somebody riding harder than feels good. And when you're doing a lot of racing, it's pretty easy to... to ride just a little hard, especially if you're feeling good, and you're in good form. So then, you know, riding as easy as feels good, they can be a little too hard sometimes. But actually, one more point on the motor unit recruitment thing. Like, the proportion of how much fast switch and slow switch fiber somebody has varies quite a lot. And so... I actually kind of balk every time I hear somebody say, okay, well, you're going to recruit this many, you know, your fast-twitch fibers or your slow-twitch fibers or whatever. And I'm like, you actually cannot tell. Hey, you have no idea. Yeah, and somebody like me, I have fast-twitch fibers coming out of my eyeballs. Like, and no matter if I rode at, like, you know, if I ride at easy endurance pace, even at my most well-trained, if I rode at easy endurance pace for like two hours, I was probably recruiting some fast-twitch fibers at some level. And because I just have a huge proportion of it. And it appears to be that like really well endurance trained fast twitch fibers can behave so very close to Oh, they do. Yeah, for sure. Slow twitch fibers. Yeah. Oh, you're absolutely right about that. I mean, there's a there's a couple studies on like cross country skiers looking at fast twitch fibers in the in the lats and also in the quads. Glutes, I think. I forget where the third muscle was. But they had a lot – maybe it was just the two. But they had a lot of the exact same properties as the slow-twitch fibers in terms of citrate synthase activity, HAD activity. There was one other thing they looked at. But they could be just about as good as fat burners and definitely just about as well endurance trained in terms of maintaining cellular energy state as the slow-twitch fibers. And I bet, honestly, if you look at rowers, I think rowers have probably the best trained fast twitch fibers of all sports. Because their cadences are like, what, 20 to 40 or something like that. And, you know, they're basically doing deadlifts for 20 minutes. Sounds great. It's a horrible sport. It's a really horrible sport. Talk to any rower. They love it. Yeah, it sounds like there's some terrible coaching in rowing as well. It just sounds like, yeah, really, yeah. Well, every time I train a rower, they're probably the best at the go hard rest, go hard rest, like that kind of repeatability. That's really interesting. Because I think it seems like they've got some of the best trained large motor units. And that's what I prefer to call them, large motor units, because I don't know the type. But like, you can kind of get a sense of how somebody's like, A Proportion, you know, kind of by their sprint to threshold relationship, but also I find that their heart rate decoupling reveals a lot about that. Because I remember training a guy where I never, no matter what I had him do, unless it was like VO2s, like we never saw heart rate decoupling. Like he could do an FTP test, like 40 minutes, 60 minutes at threshold, and it was rock solid. Went nowhere. And I was like, that's a lot of, that's a lot of slow twitch fibers. He is very, very efficient. Yeah, whereas like someone else I coach who has like a powerlifting background and he just went out for an easy, easy endurance ride that was three hours and it was something like 12% decoupling over the three hours. And he probably felt fine. Yeah, I said to him, are you sure you were under LT1 towards the end there? And he's just like, no problem at all, it's cruising. Yeah, I've got a guy who races crits and is, you know, moderate volume and fairly well trained and, you know, even at his most rested. Similar to my client I just mentioned, yeah. Yeah, and even at his most rested, like doing like a, just FTP intervals. We see a huge amount of decoupling every single interval. And I mean, that's just how it is. He's probably got a huge proportion of fast-rich fibers and that's that. But anyway, to kind of bring this all back home. Focus. Yeah. I actually have on my list of episodes to discuss the relationship between training zones, quote unquote. and like fiber type and recruitment and things like that because all the available evidence doesn't really support the way that I think a lot of people kind of think about recruitment and fast-rich and slow-rich fibers because it seems to escape some folks, not to say that they're dumb or anything like that. I don't think they've seen this area of the literature where fast-rich fibers can be incredibly well-trained, like endurance trained, and are not just like obligate lactate producers. Yeah, yeah, as some companies try to make up. Not to name too many names here. So let's talk about, since we just kind of went through kilojoules, let's talk about TSS, because I think in terms of kilojoules, especially if you're just considering under LT1, first of all, like, how do we measure LT1? Actually, I've talked about this on the podcast many times before, but like, how do you tell somebody to recognize LT1? The highest intensity, they can still eat crisps or rice cakes. Why? Because they're not breathing that hard and so all the dry dust doesn't choke them? Yeah. Or sing or be able to talk. Okay, so passing the talk test as in you want to be able to be in a business meeting, nobody knowing that you're exercising. Yeah, well, I've got some nice videos of my clients singing and rapping to make sure they're under LT1. But in all seriousness, we kind of start with discussions like that. And I do look at heart rate decoupling, and I found a test that works pretty well, is if we start, we ballpark LT1, we say, you know, we kind of have a discussion like we've just had, and say, where do you think your LT1 is? We start 10, like, say, 30 watts below that, and then 10-minute stages, like... Works best on the turbo on Erg Mode, increase the power by 10 watts each 10 minutes, and then I just get people to like give me, record a little video at the end of each of that, record what their heart rate, recording the heart rate, power and RPE, and just look for where that RPE starts to increase faster than just like... the 10 watts each stage. So I've not only used that, but that's kind of, I found that that actually works really well. But then also, then when it starts coming to like the real world, because something that's also really important to remember with LT1 is that even in quite well-trained people, it starts to deteriorate, well, I say relatively quickly, but I mean like after, even after like three hours, it can. James Sprague's study showed that in pretty well-trained people, that after two and a half hours, on average, LT1 had decreased by 10%. So if you go out and you've got a 250-watt LT1, then after just two and a half hours, it's down at 225. So if you've been riding at 230, and then you're still riding at 230 after three hours, you're actually riding over LT1 after three hours. So I start with kind of... You know, my ballpark kind of, let's get kind of roughly there. And then a bit of it is what I've often found with my clients is, you know, set them to do an endurance ride in a certain range. And then we'll even find that riding within, say, 20 watts of what we thought LT1 was is actually generating a lot more fatigue than we once thought. And so I'm increasingly starting to think that... whatever LT1 actually is in this real fatigue threshold, it's actually quite a lot lower than we thought. I mean, this is exactly why. So, for example, I'll start off with people who think your LT1 is 270, 280, and we'll even try doing two-hour rides like that, and we'll find the fatigue generated is just too much. Yeah. And then they're like, oh, this close to LT1 riding is bollocks, can I go around back to doing, riding 180 watts again? Like, hang on, we don't need to go from one extreme to the other. Sometimes you dial it back and it'll say 240 to 250 watts. And they're like, yeah, I'm fine. I don't even notice any difference from riding at 200. So that's very often the way I go. And then I've got some clients who swear to me if I ride at, you know, say 220 or if I ride at 180, I don't notice any difference in over two hours or three hours in any difference in the fatigue generated. So that's how I know. This is under LT1, I'm confident. And in that case, if we're getting more adaptation and no more extra fatigue, I'm not sure I fully believe them. Well, so, I mean, this comes down to something practical. And so, like, when you podcast as often as I do and you want to give people some very general advice on, you know, how intense to train with this stuff, like... I, this is why I ballpark it. I just say, give me 60 to 80% of your LT1, like ride there. That's plenty. And if you're riding longer than a handful of hours, like most people can't, but like when you do, like you may want to go even a little lower. But for the most part, like that kind of range seems to work well, even when LT1 starts to drop with fatigue, which I find that it does even day to day. as fatigue mounts, especially later in the training block. So that's why I just want somebody to ride to RPE, ride to what feels good. And a lot of times when somebody says, this felt a little too easy, and I look at it and I'm like, this is like 10 watts below what you did for a longer ride a little while ago. And that probably means you're getting more fit, but I don't necessarily think it's too easy. I just appreciate that it's... You know, there's more stuff happening under the hood, and we can see progress that way. But at the same time, when I have people go out and ride their endurance pace, I want them, I want to ease the mental burden of like a long endurance ride. And I don't want them to be overthinking while they ride. And I'm not saying that you do this. What I quite often do there is I get people to get a screen on their Garmin where the only things they can see are time and their current heart rate. And so, a lot of people often ask me, should I get lactate to measure LT1? It's actually much less reliable than heart rate. So your LT1 heart rate, as your LT1 changes, and day to day, your LT1 heart rate is going to be much more stable than your lactate at LT1. That's true. As far as I know, that's true. Well, once I kind of have a rough idea of what someone's LT1 heart rate is, I knock off five to ten beats per minute. And then I just say, when you go out for your ride, just make sure you never go above this. And I often have to stress that as people continue to not listen. As they dehydrate or ride too hard. Yeah, yeah. Or just chase KOMs or whatever interests them on that date. Yeah, that's not a good way to go on your endurance rides is chasing KOMs. Definitely not, no. But, oh yeah, sometimes I'll just say to ride, say someone's LT1 heart rate is 145, I might say, try to keep it between 125 and 135 on a particular ride. And I find that when you're riding it on the real world, that can be a lot less stressful, because you're not having to sweat about exactly what the power is, because any, again, we're talking about homeostatic disturbances, and if you're doing If your threshold's 250 and you do 300 watts for like 20 seconds, that's not going to raise your heart rate above that, above your LT1 heart rate, and that's proving that it's like a negligible homeostatic disturbance, so it's not going to matter. But if you do that a lot, it's going to add up. Yeah, because then it's going to start increasing your heart rate, isn't it? And you'll notice that. You'll notice from your heart rate and your RPE. Yeah, I would say heart rate's probably a good proxy. for such things. I'm not the hugest fan of relying on it because like everybody kind of knows at this point, it's going to respond to your level of excitement slash arousal and dehydration and fueling and caffeine and ADHD medications and take your pick, the list goes on. So a lot of the time, instead of- RPE is king. RPE is king. I agree, or Queen, or just, we'll just call it Monarch. RP is the Monarch. The Goat. Yeah. So... The Bogacha. Marx would like to have a word. And so would Mariana Voss. Let's just dig into TSS. So, TSS is kind of where everybody more falls into for quantifying training load. And this is where the PMC comes from. This is where we get like CTL and ATL and TSB. And more or less, it's the square of intensity factor. And so this actually, I think... Centered on your FTP, which is the important thing. Centered on your FTP, yeah, right. And that's one of the downsides of like not having a way to be able to easily quantify LT1 and that second threshold. Yeah, so it doesn't take this one... Straight into one big con of it. It doesn't take into account what your LT1 is. So your LT1 could be 50% of FTP, or it could be 85, 90% even. But to TSS's credit, it does have, it does do a better job than KiloJuels in reflecting the reduced duration that you can hold higher intensities. Yeah, so my argument is never that kilojoules applies to all intensities. I'm only talking about sub-LT1 endurance work. So a thousand kilojoules of work over threshold is not even close to equal to a thousand kilojoules of work below LT1. I mean, who can do 1,000 over threshold? Oh, my God. Exactly. It's complete. It's not comparable. So I'm only talking about sub-LT1 work. Yeah. Whereas TSS is kind of, yeah, it's talking about something else because it's encompassing all training load and trying to, like, make, yeah, it's kind of trying to be able to compare high intensity with low intensity with middle intensity and put it all together to some total weighted. Training Load. Well, and so it's going to more heavily weight higher intensities based on this. But also, scoring it as like 100 TSS for an hour threshold, it also makes the assumption that, well, it doesn't really make an assumption, it makes an implicit assumption that, you know, you can do your FTP for an hour. You can do your threshold for an hour. Yeah. Which I don't think is necessarily an accurate interpretation of the original. Kind of impetus of TSS, but I think I understand based on the misinterpretations of, well, or the original ways that it's been written in training racing with a power meter and these subsequent interpretations that everybody kind of has this 60 minutes thing in their head, which we don't need to get into again. That's also going into like stress and strain, isn't it? Because you could say like, if you've got a... So do the stress and strain. Definition Quick for Folks. So if you think of like bending a rod or a pen like I've got here, stress is like how much weight is being put here. So it's the external. Is the external what's being applied and strain is actually like how much is the pen bending. So it's the internal load. Yeah. Right. So if you do 60 minutes at FTP when you've got a TTE of 60 minutes versus if you do it when you've got a TTE of 70 minutes, the stress is going to be the same, but the strain is going to be different. Yeah. And I mean, that's a drawback for everything because we cannot quantify what's happening internally without making a huge amount of assumptions. that are mostly going to be wrong and introduce such error into our measurements that it's basically going to be useless. So we can really only quantify our output on the bike, really. And heart rate, I'd say, is probably the best measure of internal strain, but it's far from perfect. But TSS is kind of trying to achieve that by centering around your FTP. So if you change your FTP in training peaks, then the same session in terms of absolute intensity is going to yield a different TSS. Right. Whereas it's not going to yield a different kilojoule total or a different total duration. Right. Well, I think one of the upsides here actually is that It's always going to be set by what you have done previously. So like, it's not like- Or what you want it to be. Or what you want it to be, yeah. So if you are training like 10 hours a week, let's say, and your CTL typically is around like 60 to 70, maybe 75, even up to 80 in some rare cases. The TSS is going to be reflective of what you have done in the past. And so if you like, well, here's where there's a drawback is it creates a false equivalence between, well, it's a real equivalence, but in terms of fatigue, it's a false equivalence in terms of duration and intensity, kind of like the way kilojoules does, but it'll do it at any intensity. Well, we could look at kilojoules at any intensity, and sometimes I do look at kilojoules at every intensity. But regardless, I think in a Good Way. If you go out and you do 3x10 for FTP, and the next time you go out and you do 3x12, you have increased your TSS, and so you're going to be able to see that metric of TSS drive forward, but I'd rather personally just look at interval time and power. We're only comparing these three different ways of looking at sub-LT1 training load, because I don't think we're saying that you'd look at kilojoules. to compare total training load, whereas you would do that with TSS. You wouldn't use hours to look at total training load. Well, here's the thing. If you ignore the fatigue that you gain when you go over LT1, or same with below and above FTP, you can use kilojoules. Because if you look at You're giving me that face. You're giving me the scrunch. Don't give me the scrunch. This is a hypothetical. I'm not saying you should do this. But I know a lot of people that do this. They go, oh, well, if I just look at kilojoules in a vacuum, then I should ride this hard and I should blah, blah, blah. Or the same happens with TSS, because you know that this is going to happen. And so regardless of our kind of academic wonking, I think this is still a worthy Metric for Discussion. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, absolutely. I think just to bear in mind that TSS is, the purpose of TSS is to be able to like integrate all types of training and intensity into one metric. Right. And it's supposed to roughly reflect a stochastic effort if done steady state or the approximate training load equivalence. of if you had done it steady state, which obviously is not a real equivalence either. Yeah, and that's because it uses normalized power, which we could do another podcast discussing why normalized power is for the fairies. It's for the what? Fairies, because it's just imaginary. Oh, okay. I'm going to edit that out because in the US, fairies is slang for homosexuals. Oh, right. What can I say instead for the wizards? Yeah, it's for people who live in Harry Potter land. Wizards. Wizards. Yeah. People who could do magic. Okay, that's awesome. Yeah. Wizards. It's for wizards. I mean, okay. Well, regardless. So, well, why don't we talk about ours then? Because Hours is how I prefer to look at training volume total, because especially the way I've developed a kind of training methodology, if I look at just total hours, that actually I find has the best correlation with fatigue resistance, and are you okay? That was very loud. So to me, yeah, hours has some of the best correlation to fatigue resistance. And as long as done sufficiently easy, will in a vacuum to me, well, it'll also quantify every little bit of time that you spend pedaling at threshold and above, because it's still time pedaling. The only place where it falls really short is if somebody is actually doing their recovery rides appropriately easy. And so if we want to, because TSS is fun to use for recovery rides, I find. Less than, let's say like 15 TSS for an hour. That's an appropriate recovery ride. And I think even if it's like single digits, if I see nine TSS, I'm like, I bet you can get it down to seven. So that's really where it falls short because I don't necessarily think recovery rides are. Probably sufficient intensity to induce much adaptation at all, because it's barely what you would do, like walking your elderly grandparent around the block. Or like taking the trash out, unless it's a very heavy trash bag. So I prefer ours personally for those reasons. So the first thing I'll say that I don't like about ours is that it implies that there's like Some kind of minimum intensity below which you're not training and above which you are training. Does it imply that? I don't necessarily think so. Well, it does because it means like, so, well, yeah, like, so if you're riding it 20 watts, then does that count towards my hours? No, and that's why I just said it. And you're going to say no. Doing recovery rides. So that means if I ride 50? No. And then that means at some point the number's going to be big enough that you're going to say, oh yeah, that does count. Well, as in all things, there is a very fuzzy border. And so if I break it out in terms of this is a recovery ride and this is an endurance ride. So what physiologically is going on? Because I could do the same to you. I could say you've got, with kilojoules, you could say, okay, if I need to burn 2,000 kilojoules on this ride, if I do it over 24 hours, like that's barely... Yeah, you'd have the same effect. Would it? Yeah, and you can see in these studies from... I don't necessarily think that's true. ...like three times 10 minute walks per day. Has the same effect on their, like, VO2max health outcomes. Who is doing three times ten minute walks besides people who barely move? And even if you are that person, yeah, it's great, but we're talking about well-trained endurance athletes here. So, and so you're, I think you're right, though. At a certain point, like, there is a, there is, you know, if you, if you walk. around, if you hike for like 24 hours, if you ride your bike at like, you know, your 24-hour hiking intensity for 24 hours, like, yeah, sure, you're going to induce quite a bit of adaptation. But I think that it still is the, I think we're getting into absurd, absurd things to, you know. absurd niches and issues to find with each other's ideas here. Well, I think the reason you're using hours works so well most of the time is because most people tend to do their endurance riding at roughly the same pace. So if you increase their hours, you've also increased their kilojoules because they've done more work. If they try to increase their kilojoules by... If we're talking about under LT1, yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. So, it's just you, my arm at all times, unless I say this. I'll put a sticky up about that. Yeah, yeah, just on my head. Okay. So, yeah, it tends, so, but when you're saying how well total hours written is correlated with your... your athlete's fatigue resistance. I'd imagine that if you then correlate to that with kilojoules, the correlation would be exactly the same near enough or if not stronger. That's because I expect people to ride at a certain... At the same pace. Yeah, at the same pace. And because if you break it out between like, this is your endurance ride pace, this is your recovery ride pace, there's a gulf between them. And you don't have to worry about that gulf, because that's where that fuzzy area of, is this enough or is this not? Because like, just existing, you're putting out like 50, 60 watts, right? Depending on your BMR and all the other stuff. And so like, but does that induce adaptation? It doesn't. You actually, you need contractions. Well, it is actually really continuous. Spectrum, because, you know, if you get put into a coma. Unless your muscles are doing nothing, because you need the contractions at the very best level. Yeah, so if you end up getting put into a coma, then you're going to wither faster, or if you're an astronaut and you get put into space without anti-gravity, without no gravity. Right, because you're not contracting your muscles. Then you can lose all the muscle mass in like 48 hours. So, you know, even normal homies, like just normal day-to-day life is actually... Doing Something to Maintain. That's true. And it's a continuous spectrum of, like, you know, doing completely, like, nothing at all to doing eight-hour endurance rides right pinned to LT1. There is, there's no, like, discrete pointer, which is, like, this is suddenly doing something that slightly lower isn't, and it's just, it is that. Like, the more work done, the more adaptation, the less work done, the less adaptation. But I still think you and I have the same issue between hours and kilojoules, hours for me and kilojoules for you, where there's a minimum expectation. So I think it's good to get out of the way first, is that we don't actually disagree, like the way we train people here is basically... Yeah, that's true. But I seem to care more about... Like, why that's the case? And yeah, you seem to think I'm wasting my breath. Well, I don't necessarily think so, because you've come up with a system that works for you, and we've achieved, this is convergent evolution. We've achieved basically the same thing by two somewhat different, but basically parallel means. I mean, eyes, in terms of all history of life, have evolved separately, like what, 14, 15 times? Yeah. It turns out it's very useful to be able to see electromagnetic radiation on a certain spectrum. So we can all do it. Or most of us can do it unless you're a mole rat. So sorry for your mole rat parents if you're listening. But yeah, I think a lot of the criticisms we've leveled at each other for each other's training philosophy is really just nitpicky bullshit. And at the end of the day, I mean, I'm just having fun here. I actually am, I don't really. No place I'd rather be. I'm not even bothered by like, because I've, I do get bothered by some training philosophies out there. I really, I genuinely do. And I know you do too. Oh yeah. Yeah. And like your training philosophy doesn't bother me one bit because I understand completely where it comes from and it's utility. And it's just, if I started to do that, I would not, I would drive myself nuts. thinking about duration and kilojoules and intensity, and I'd be doing math, and I'd do it wrong half the time, so I would need to create a table, and I'd always have this table up in my other laptop, and it would drive me nuts over time. But I appreciate that you are able to work within those parameters. I mean, I don't even, yeah, I don't think I'm working quite in exactly the same. No, because it's just to me, it would be, It would be more mental load than it would be worth, and it would be not as good for my clients. So when it comes to actually prescribing a ride for my client, I never say... You never say, give me exactly these many watts or... Give me these many kilojoules, but I will say, sometimes I prescribe by heart rate range, sometimes power range, sometimes an RPE range, most often a combination of... The Two, but not Three. So just depending on the person, where exactly that is in their periodization, what they've got coming up. So all this what I'm talking about, as in why I think KiloJules drives the adaptation, that's just my principle. Under LT1. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Asterisk, footnote, MB, under LT1. Yeah, but then, like, when it does come to actually, like, prescribing training, yeah, I am giving X hours with X, like, intensity range. And then what I also say to my clients is, you know, say you go on a, say you would have ridden it, normally you do endurance ride it, too. 210, 220 watts. And you go on a group ride with some people and it's a lot slower and it's 180, 170 watts. And then, you know, what I say to them is, like, don't, like, that's not a bad thing and you can get the same adaptation if you just throw on an extra half an hour loop after. You know, you can get the same total work done. And actually, then you realise that you've also got the same total work done and you're fresher, so. Maybe there's even some advantages to it. So if you've got the time. So I educate my clients in that this is what matters. But then how you actually go about achieving it is by riding. Most of the time, when you've got time, riding longer and easier, which is what we agree on. Yeah. And I would usually say even if you're riding easier, if it costs you any stress, or anything to be out longer, like if you don't have enough food or anything like that, just go home, good enough. If you want to tack on the extra time another day, fine, go ahead, but I really don't care. Because in the long run, like half hour is not going to make a huge difference. And so... But as I say, an extra 10 minutes every ride is an extra hour a week and an extra hour a week is an extra 50 hours a year. And I'd say that's not at all negligible. That's true. Until... Well, I think it depends on the... But the stress of thinking... Depends on the client, yeah. Because if they spend that 10 minutes extra, that extra 50 hours a year, and that costs them a marriage, it's not worth it at all. Or a job, no, don't do that. No. Yeah, you and I, we are fortunate to work with several people, quite a few people actually, who can just ride all the time. But I know that you and I also stay grounded by coaching people who have eight hours of ride to week, 10, like if. If that. So how do you quantify training volume and training load over LT1 if we are going to un-asterisk your asterisk? Do you just use CTL? Tell me you don't use CTL. I know you can't. I mean, I look at it, but I look more, I think more carefully about total session days. As well. So, I don't think I've ever given anyone more than four session days. Oh, no, three hard, three days above LT1 in a week. Yeah, same. Obviously, double days. I have two people who get four, and that's it. But they don't train that high of volume. I don't think I've ever, I don't think I've ever sat that, other than when someone's had a four-day stage race or, but where was I going with that? Training load. Oh, so, so. Oh, yeah, so how many hard days? Yeah, so, so, like, And I'm quite careful with that. I really try to not waste any hard days. So we try to minimize any times when you're doing a ride and you just end up being unstructured intensity there. Or I'll also try to avoid perhaps just doing openers. Because I find that openers, if you're in the middle of a training block before a race or a session, it's just a wasted high intensity. You're going to get that. Oh, it's lovely. Openers are a privilege for the well-rested, to quote Nat Ward, one of my old coaches. And I completely agree with that still. Like, I see a lot of people will do like, you know, mid-cross season, they'll like race Saturday, Sunday, Monday's rest day, Tuesday's intervals, Wednesday's cross practice, Thursday's rest, Friday's openers. I'm like, why do you need openers? Why? It's like everyone in France. Yeah. Like, day blockage, they call it. And they just have some, like, really fancy pyramid with, like... And an aperitif. And a cigarette. A bottle of wine. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. And then they get in their Doge Vo that they've had since 1949. It's archaic. Well, so how would you look at a long ride with intervals? Like, five hours with, like, 4x15 FTP or something like that? Like, how would you break out your quantification? Like, would you separate out the, like... like the, you know, hours that don't have FTP and call that your sub-LT1, like, because you can break that out in WKO5 with a little bit of math and stuff, but. Well, so, so the, the, say the kilojoules that you, that you're doing over LT1, they are still, you're going to get all this, so, say you do a thousand kilojoules over LT1 and a thousand kilojoules below. You'll still get all the same things by doing it over, you know, exactly the same, but then you'll also get other stuff on top. So, like, the stuff that you do over LT1, it counts towards your sub-LT1, just the same, but then you're also getting other adaptations on top, if that makes sense. So, it's like... It does, but, like, why have you been harping on all this, like, sub-LT1 stuff, then, if it's all kind of the same? Because the asterisk is that once you're over it, that you're also getting other stuff, you're also getting... What's other stuff? Other fatigue. Like, you get more fatigue, you get more motor unit recruitment, you get, you know, different adaptation pathways. Yeah, so you're getting all kinds of other adaptations that you're not getting when you're below, and you're also getting, like... Much more fatigue than you would when you're below. Well, the fatigue, yes. For example, like... I don't necessarily agree that there's like other adaptations. Well, I think you are. You're getting larger motor units. The central adaptations you can get by riding over LT1, like well over doing VO2 max work, you're never going to get that. Oh, well, VO2 max work, yeah. But that's, you know, you can do a handful of minutes like that, a handful of kilojoules. Well, yeah, it was... Yeah, yeah, but that's what I'm saying, it still counts. Well, and this is... Well, because that's why all, that's why to me, I just look at hours, all peddling time is roughly equivalent in those terms, and I think that's why you're looking at kilojoules, even though the kilojoules are going to scale a little more with the higher intensity. I don't think it would scale. I said a little, a little more. Oh, yes, yeah, yeah, no, no, no, yeah, I do agree with you. Sorry, sorry, I hope I got confused. That's all right, it's been a long conversation. It has, yeah. But so, but we're talking about how I'd separate intensity from... Yeah, so like looking at total training load, because I do something similar in that I will track, I'll track total time, and I'll compare, I'll just compare it to... You know, CTL, because I know if everybody's training roughly the same way, CTL will have roughly the same significance in terms of its content. And I also look at, I look at higher intensity stuff on top of all that too. And I also look at, you know, how somebody's like relative feeling and their RPE and all that kind of stuff and their stress metrics. And for people who menstruate, I'll look at their menstrual cycle as well on top of all that. And so like, and then, you know, I'm trying to get a whole picture, and I feel like if you just kind of focus on, well, I'm sure you agree with this, and most coaches would, if you focus on one particular metric too much, you are going to be missing a lot about an athlete. Yeah, I couldn't agree more. Oh, then why are we having this chat? Why are we here? I'm just kidding. So, is there anything else that we didn't really get to? Because I think that's pretty much... All my stuff, because we have a couple listener questions, and I think that they are going to be really fun. I posted these with very short notice, and we have a ton. Yeah. I'm just saying that, like, an advantage of looking at hours for, like, the most... Big middle of the bell curve of the population is that it's going to mean that they're not going to ride, it's going to discourage riding too hard. But like I said, yeah, yeah, it's going to discourage people from riding over LT1 and or riding, spending too much time riding right close to it. I know you say you've never seen anyone, in your opinion, you've never seen that people ride Too easy on endurance rides? No, I actually have. Like, a handful of times, I've been like, I think that's borderline. Yes. You know, between the intensity and the duration, or the kilojoules, like you would say. Yeah. But, mostly, I'd say 98% of the time, people ride a little too hard if they're doing anything wrong at all. Or, in my opinion, what would be wrong or suboptimal, let's say. So, it's usually the fact that... I've mostly been preaching towards this thing of I see people riding too hard. And I rarely see people riding too easy. And when they do ride too easy, I'm like, you can pick up the pace a little bit. But at the same time, if this is comfortable for you for one reason or another, like you're riding with your partner, your mother, your father, or something like that, or me, somebody who's not so well-trained, then yeah, it's great. It's good enough. And I don't want to make anybody feel bad for enjoying you know one of the other aspects of cycling that's great um because I don't want people to like stop riding with their friends if they if they're like oh I'm riding too easy I can't ride with you like fuck that go ride with your friends who cares like do the training on another day yeah um because uh yeah I I also I also just I don't like to look at it though either as um I don't like to phrase it as too Too Hard, just like I would like to say there is good food or bad food. Well, knowing your diet. It's like, it's just, yeah, what are you trying to achieve? Like, who are you? Who are you? When are you? And what are you trying to achieve? Who are you? When are you? Boy, I think this is about to turn into a very different podcast. Yeah. Alright, so I want to get to a couple listener questions for this. Podcast gets to the usual gargantuan lengths. Okay, well we talked about that. Are endurance hours ours, or should you expect less fitness off recovery ride pace? Expect less fitness off recovery ride pace. As in, is the adaptation lower, I think? The adaptation is less, but if you have... a hard VO2max session the next day, then... It's probably good to go in there with less stress in your legs. Yeah. Although that's because you're going to get more out of your VO2max work, it's not because you're getting more out of your easy endurance slash recovery ride. Yeah, I agree. Well, this is somebody who has very occasionally, knowing the question asker, has very occasionally ridden borderline too easy, but doing it with... Good People for Long Durations. And I'm like, you know what? Maybe it was a little too easy, but I don't care. I'm glad that you did this right. Well, and if also it means that their morale is high, that they stay out longer, they end up doing more work and it's more work. Well, I know for this person, it's not more work, it's less. But yeah, I think the morale and the enjoyment is a huge part of it. But even in your long term, If every third week you do your endurance ride slower so you can ride with a different group, you do more work long term and it's more work over the weeks, months and years that makes a difference rather than any single ride. Yeah, I would say more hours total and also, you know, just getting more out of everything. Yeah. More out of life. Let's see, does timing of volume matter in season or is more good all the time? So I guess we'll tackle these more training-ish questions too. So is that saying, is that about like periodization? But also to put it another way, to put one of my usual phrases into a question, does How does volume ever go out of style in terms of like periodization? And my answer is usually it doesn't unless you are coming off the couch because you do not want to like take a two-week break mid-season and then get right back to smashing like 20-hour weeks because you need a little bit of dissipation of the stress from the previous season and so like gradually increasing the duration at that point makes sense. But in season, most people's Especially when you're racing, most people's volume takes a hit because you are racing. And instead of doing a- A lot of it is because of like logistics. And logistics. Like you can't ride as much as you want when you are like traveling to a race, you know, five hours away. And so like, yeah, all the stuff around racing too. And sometimes, well, maybe for you, the races aren't, you know, much different in terms of duration, but like for a lot of amateurs, like if they ride four or five hours as their long ride and they go do an hour and a half circuit race. That's a very, very different prospect between the two in terms of training. And so that's where I see a lot of people's- So I normally encourage my clients to ride after the race. I do too, but most of them can't. They really genuinely cannot. And so I just say, don't worry about it. The volume is going to be a little lower, but it takes less to maintain where you are rather than to keep building. And you don't want to build mid-race season. That's a waste of resources. You're going to burn out real quick. 

Yeah. Let's see. How does, quote unquote, too easy training, as in under the desk bike, fit into the training volume calculation? Just add in however many kilojoules you've done. I would say this is probably something where the kilojoules would probably be a better proxy than duration. Because especially if you can do this for 40 hours a week while you're working, that's a huge amount of exercise. Huge. Yeah. So, an example, one of my clients who worked in a hospital and he said, you know, should I try and, you know, he's quite time restricted, he can only ride about seven hours a week. He's still getting in 50,000 steps a day, I bet. Well, and so I said, he said to him, he said to me, should I, you know, I have to like go up and down stairs a lot, should I try and take the lift to save my legs or take the stairs? And I said, just. Whilst on your non-recovery days, if you've not got something hard coming up the next day, just get in as many steps as you can. And then on your recovery days, when you've got some hard efforts the next day, just take the lift. Yeah. Elevator for Americans. Elevator. I know. Elevator. It's coming out of your mouth with disdain, I see it. Actually, I've found that in all reports, because I... I don't know a ton of people who are able to do very low load exercise a lot during their days, but the ones who do say it actually has a huge positive impact on their fitness and their endurance, even if it's a different modality like cycling to walking or anything like that. And I actually found that when I was doing carpentry work, I found that I had better endurance than when I wasn't. And it was mostly because I was just moving constantly for eight hours a day. That's what I mean. There's no minimum intensity. Yeah. And it only sucked because when I got home, some hard days, I was definitely that little bit fatigued and I couldn't quite dig like I wanted to. But a lot of the time, I would say 80% of the time, 75, 80, I would get home and still have a really good session. But mostly because most of my days weren't super hard. So, yeah. Let's see. How quickly can you ramp up volume after a long break slash short break slash new to training, et cetera? New to training is a different one. Yeah, it's very individual. Some people have a way higher capacity to do higher training loads very quickly, and some people will flame out very fast if you build it too fast. Yeah, and one thing that can make a difference is if you trained at a high level before and then you're coming back to that level, you can normally ramp a lot faster than if you've never been at that level before. So you've never ridden 20 hours in a week before. You'd be well served to take a while to build up to that. Yeah, I usually recommend if you are fairly well trained, especially if you're going from like You know, like, let's say six hours a week to like 20 plus, you could probably ramp it up by like an hour and a half to two hours per week. And if you are not so well trained, you're probably going to want to look at like 30 minutes to an hour per week to build volume. And just along the way as you're going along there, just you've got to assess how are things going. Because I've found I've trained some people from relative beginners who I've actually been shocked by how, you know, How well they have been able to tolerate the increase in volume. And I've kind of been too much on the conservative side of reflection. And with other people, I've been... You'd rather be on the conservative side than the other side. Well, this is what I mean, is if you feel like you've been too aggressive, then it's just having systems in place to recognize that and then to dial back before it gets too bad. But that also requires an athlete who... is willing to give you the feedback along those systems that you need, because we have certainly worked with folks who are reticent to do that, or with people who think, oh, coach knows best, but you and I operate the same way in that we need people's feedback, and that's really the best indicator of the appropriate training load. But I think also performance speaks miles for that there. That's true. If someone's performance is tanking and they can't do... They can't hit their numbers when they're trying to do any intensity. And, you know, I think the way both of us coach now is at least there's going to be some amount of intensity where you're going to be able to gauge how someone's doing, you know, at least once a week or, you know, not that infrequently, even just throwing in short sprints and stuff like that to kind of gauge how someone's doing so that you can kind of get indicators of fatigue, even if they're not talking. Well, I've seen performance. You know, as much as that is my usual indicator, it actually falls short sometimes too, because everything will fall short in some cases. I've got clients who, even when they're very, very fatigued, can set like lifetime best numbers and... With a new power meter. With the same power meter. I'm just joking. Yeah. I do have a couple of clients who are like, oh, this is the Shimano power meter, ignore these numbers. Yeah, terrible. Okay, more questions about cross-training and non- okay, we kind of got to that. When life reduces your volume, should you just accept it and move on, or put a little more intensity in? I'm curious to hear your answer, because I know what I would usually say. Well, I think the person who's asking that question probably knows the answer. Just it's like one of those cases where you're saying like they just want to hear it from someone else. Well, why don't we hear it from you before we hear it from me? So go ahead. If life stress is making it hard for you to do anything, then the last thing you need is to pile on intensity on the bike on top of that. Yeah, that's my answer too, 100%. And I think low intensity riding can be... Potentially really good for your head at that point. But trying to do intervals is not going to go well and it's only going to make you more stressed and then probably even ride even less and then like spiral and just worse and worse. Yeah, I usually tell people when you... In fact, what I have found interesting on this note is that people's intensity, discipline and like, what's the word, compliance tends to get worse the more stressed they are. Yeah. And then that kind of gets into a negative spiral like... People, you know, when I've set people endurance rides and they go, when they start to go for their random KOMs just to kind of make themselves feel slightly better. For fun, yeah. Yeah, motivation. Yeah, although what I find is it doesn't make you feel better and actually if you just go out and you actually just take it easy, that's actually what you need. I agree. I think, well, this is where I would... Try to dive back the intensity to like maybe one medium kind of day a week, something like that, or possibly two. But I would usually tell somebody, if you're that stressed, save your legs for something that matters if you have something coming up. Like if you have a race coming up, that's even like a B priority race. As you approach it, if your stress level goes through the roof, the last thing you want to do is... because I find that people have one good day of legs in them when the stress gets really high. And if the stress is super high, you're not going to recover at all. And so that's where you want to handle your good legs with kid gloves because your sleep, your nutrition, your hydration, everything is going to suffer as this stress goes through you. And so when you get to your main race, if you were like, I got to cram in the last of my training sessions, don't do that. Just be nice to yourself about all that stuff. So yeah, okay, cool, same answer. Next question is, explain the not all TSS is the same in the context of weeks and months. What's a better metric? So I prefer hours as a better metric, but yeah, like let's get into like not all TSS is the same. What we kind of did already. But let's answer it explicitly. I don't think ours is not a replacement for TSS. No, it's not. But with ours, it's not going to make you ride harder. That's one of the big benefits, I think. And also, you can only handle so much TSS in a week, especially as you... Ride More. And so the party trick I have is that if you ask somebody how many hours per week they usually ride, if somebody says 10 hours per week, if you kind of figure maybe they do like six to eight on a rest week, you can take about 75% of their total hours and guess their CTL, because that's the average intensity factor most people can basically maintain. And so if somebody says 10 hours a week, you'd be like, your CTL is probably 75. And you're going to be pretty close every time. And so over a while, the CTL, which is really just your average TSS for like, what, 40 some odd days, it really just reflects your total training volume. And so when you make the false equivalence of, oh, I need to train harder because I got races coming up. And so if I want to maintain the same TSS, I need to do less. Easy Rider, I need to do more hard riding to maintain my TSS. Well, I don't necessarily find that to be the right equivalence for all the reasons we've kind of discussed with fatigue. Yeah, it depends whether someone really is time restricted or not. Yeah. Yeah, but like, yeah, TSS is a quantification of load, but... I think the other difference is that when you look at the PMC and you look at like TSB, which is supposed to roughly gauge how fresh your legs are, I find that it does not correlate very well with probably 50-75% of people. No, no, training stress balance, yeah, I don't find. Sometimes it tells people they're fresh when they're tired and sometimes it tells people they're tired when they're fresh. And somebody's like, my TSB, I've been recovering for so long. My TSB is so positive. How come I'm still wrecked? Well, you're still tired. You're not that fresh right now. So yeah. And this is, I think, one of the drawbacks of taking any tool to its logical extremes. Like whether it's kill jewels, whether it's duration, whether it's TSS, whether it's anything. Because when you get to logical extremes, then More is Always More. Well, what I don't like about TSS is that there's nothing that it's basically just an algorithm that someone has made up, you know, some wizard. Me and you could sit here now. He's freshly shaven, by the way. Some freshly shaven wizard has just invented. An algorithm. So, you know, we could go in and invent our own metrics, such similar metric, that it's based, if normalized power is what it's based on, and we could make up our own metric for normalized power right here, right now. And so it's just totally imaginary, whereas at least like with hours and kilojoules, it's based on something more fundamental. That's true, yeah. I actually have found a handful of people where like the regular old PMC works perfectly for them. Well, that's probably because they just fall, you know, on average, on averages, it falls, like it works on averages, isn't it? So if you're right in the middle of the bell curve, then you might just happen to work all right. Yeah, no, that's true. Let's see. I'm sure you've never been asked this before, but how do you quantify intensity versus volume? I actually have been asked that many times. I have some proprietary WKL5 charts about quantifying intensity versus volume. So I cannot share their content because we got to hold something back for our clients. But I do have ways to measure intensity. So how about you? Well, you just got to sign up for Kilowatt Coaching. Oh, you can sign up for Empirical Cycling. Over what period should you look at? Daily, weekly, monthly? All, really, right? Yeah, and for what? That's the whole question. There's no more. The Instagram box is not that big. Live in the Nile. Live in the now. You're either riding or you're not riding, and who wants to be not riding? Exactly. Oh, here's another training question. Is it okay to maintain high volume nearing A races? Actually, I know you have a very interesting anecdote about this. Well, yeah, so today I just had a client win quite a prestigious criterion race in the UK. And the day before the day before they did, They did seven hours a ride, and then they also did a half an hour ride to the shop and back after, and I think they've, they think they've set power PBs in this race, and nearly lapped the field in one by two minutes, and that's not actually something this particular individual has done in the past, and I've also found that with myself and with other clients that you can do some pretty long rides as long as, as we discussed, that the intensity is appropriate and have very good performances. It's not to make that as a blanket rule and I'd say, you know, if you're approaching a target race and you've got eight hours on the plan, you know, and it's even in the week of a race and you really feel like you're digging deep, cut it, knock it, knock the, Or if you've got seven, five, six hours, whatever, you and your coach have come for four hours and that might feel too much. It's both very individual to the person, it's also very individual from one week to the next. There is no one perfect taper that's going to work every time. It's going to be different. What was the race like the last weekend? What was the previous month of training like? It's all contextual. Like, yeah, like it's, it's, it's, it's, it's as much a path function as it is a state function. Yeah. So I actually have found that, yeah, the taper is like one of the most individual things. Like there are certain physiological principles that are absolutely universal. But then when it comes to like training load, training intensity, training volume, all this stuff is highly, highly, highly individual. And so I have a bunch of clients where the more they rest before a race, the more fresh they feel when they get there, the better. But I also have people where if I rest them too much before a race, their legs are just like off in la-la land and they're just nowhere to be found. So yeah, it's highly individual. And one of my clients, your coach actually, is one of the exceptions to that rule where as he's going into races, I'll maintain about the same, but we'll start to separate out the hard days, we'll add a little more recovery, drop the volume just a little bit, but he's still training just about as much as he does ever, and him, like a lot of the World Tour files I've seen from the GC podium contenders and stuff like that, a lot of the time, their best fitness comes with peak CTL. comes with the peak of their training load. It's not like if we rest them, then they're going to have their peak. No, their peak is at the top of their training load. And that's another very individual thing. Yeah. Yeah, I mean, it was just evident from some of the performances you see in stage races, like quite deep in the stage races. I mean, remember that one year Contador went to the tour. I just remember an interview. He's probably said this a million times, about a million different GC or Grand Tours that he did, but he said that he got to day one at like 90% because he knew he was going to build fitness into the race. And that's a rare bird right there. Not everybody can do that. And you look at some people like Roglic. Roglic will race like two stage races before he races a Grand Tour. like over the three or four months before that Grand Tour. And then there's like people like Bernal who's never seemed to not be racing. Oh, and there's, um, Seth Kuss did three Grand Tours in a year and won the Welter. I mean, you want to talk about a guy who rides a lot, there's one. Not as much as some of our clients. That's, that's true. But, you know, once you're on top of the mountain, it takes less to maintain being there than it does to get there. So, you know, you've still got to recover to some degree from those, from those grand tours too. And like, you know, managing the intensity is, again, it's all going to be highly individual. And so he's, him and his coach are clearly kind of dialed into exactly what he needs. And that's, that's fantastic. You love to see it. Yeah. Okay. Last question. If I'm currently able to ride Z2 at 200 watts for four hours, can I jump up 10 watts every six months and so on? So, sorry, I knew that your face was going to contort hearing that question. If only progress were linear. It's a juicy one. It's a juicy one. So first of all, I mean, I don't like, I don't like the, I don't use like five zone system like that. Yeah, same. So Z2. Let's call it endurance riding. Yeah. So first of all, how do you know it's an endurance ride? address that problem. So we would quantify endurance as like under LT1? Yeah. And then if you're completely time restricted to that four hours, then potentially, yeah, a mechanism of progression might be to progress that closer to LT1 as time goes on. So I don't think, yeah, this is not as ridiculous of a question when you break it down like that. But if you can have time to ride longer, then I'd look to progress there before you look to progress and ride harder. Just as we've been saying earlier, if you've got hard sessions, you know, VO2max, FTP work, anaerobic capacity, whatever, anything like that you want to do then. Be cautious around increasing the relevant intensity of your endurance ride more. Alright, thank you everybody for listening to the podcast, as usual, and if you would like to reach out for anything, coaching, consultation, etc., etc., you can email me, empiricalcycling at gmail.com, and if you want to get in touch with Marinus, I have his contact information up in the show notes, and if you would like to support the show, again, sharing this podcast goes a long way, a donation at empiricalcycling.com slash donate, or if you want to hire us for coaching or consultation, shoot me an email at empiricalcycling at gmail.com. Yeah, Instagram, that's it, that's the other one. So give me a follow on Instagram at Empirical Cycling if you want to ask a question or just follow along for the weekend AMAs. So, alright, let's get out of here. See you next time. 